A miserable, bitter old miser, Scrooge hates irrational things like happiness, generosity, and Christmas, until a trio of Ghosts shows him the error of his ways. Really, what's the deal with Scrooge? It's probably safe to say that there were exactly zero people like him in Dickens's reading public (nobody's that mean, right?), so he's certainly not here to make us identify with his awfulness. So what function does this character play? Well, here are two good ways to think about him.
An insolent, indifferent, and alcoholic attorney who works with Stryver. Carton has no real prospects in life and doesn’t seem to be in pursuit of any. He does, however, love Lucie, and his feelings for her eventually transform him into a man of profound merit. At first the polar opposite of Darnay, in the end Carton morally surpasses the man to whom he bears a striking physical resemblance.
Sydney Carton’s a tough nut to crack. At twenty-five, he’s obviously brilliant: he manages to make one of the stupidest men in London, Mr. Stryver, into one of the most prominent lawyers of his time. He’s also rather good-looking… at least, we’re pretty sure he is. See, he looks exactly like Charles Darnay. And Darnay is definitely attractive. Which means Sydney can’t be all that hard on the eyes, right?So, with looks and brains, Sydney should have the world at his feet… right? Well, not exactly. Orphaned at a young age, Sydney spent most of his youth writing homework for his classmates. He spends his adult years being the brains behind Stryver’s brawn. (Okay, Stryver’s not exactly brawny, but you get the picture.) Strangely enough, Sydney doesn’t exactly seem like the sort of scrawny kid who got his lunch money stolen every day. So why does he settle for living other people’s lives? Ah, that’s a good question. In fact, it’s the question that’s troubled readers of A Tale of Two Cities for, well, centuries. Believe it or not, no one has come up with any good answers.
Achilles The central character of the Iliad and the greatest warrior in the Achaian army. The most significant flaw in the temperament of Achilles is his excessive pride. He is willing to subvert the good of the whole army and to endanger the lives of those who are closest to him to achieve emotional blackmail. Chief virtue: a fighter. His humanity stems from his great passion. Iliad
The son of the military man Peleus and the sea-nymph Thetis. The most powerful warrior in Achilles commands the Myrmidons, soldiers from his homeland of Phthia in Greece. Proud and headstrong, he takes offense easily and reacts with blistering indignation when he perceives that his honor has been slighted. Achilles’ wrath at Agamemnon for taking his war prize, the maiden Briseis, forms the main subject of .
Weedon Scott He is the most important character in the novel because he represents the compassionate, humane, and kind human being who, through patience and understanding, is able to transform White Fang from a wild beast into a civilized animal. He is the only one who understands that an animal needs more than just to be fed — it also needs attention and love. In return for his companionship and love, White Fang gives Scott his complete love and devotion; he is totally obedient to him.
White Fang's the hero of the story, but Weedon is easily the most heroic character. If London wants to show us civilization at its best and worst, then Scott is absolutely the best. He's brave, he's take-charge, he doesn't compromise when it comes to right and wrong, and he follows through on his convictions no matter where they lead. He's pretty much a knight in shining denim, here to rescue White Fang from the monstrous excesses of his fellow white men and take him to the land of milk and honey where belly rubs are cheap and plentiful.
Gennaro is the legal counsel for InGen. Don't get him confused with the character in the movie: he's not the cowardly weasel he's made out to be there. Sure, in the book, he sometimes has to be persuaded to follow his better nature, but he does help out in some tight spots. He also has scruples; he's not a stereotypical sleazy lawyer. While he wants the park to be safe, knowing that it could make a fortune, the visit quickly convinces him that Jurassic Park must actually be burned to the ground: it's not safe, and it never will be. It isn't worth the investment, no matter how rich it could make him.
The head of InGen's account with the law firm Cowain, Swain and Ross. Gennaro is nervous about the progress of Jurassic Park and has heard rumors of animals getting off the island. He forces Hammond into bringing Grant, Sattler, and Malcolm in to evaluate the park. Nevertheless, Gennaro's firm has a stake in InGen, and as soon as he sees the dinosaurs he starts thinking about all the money he can make.
Still a young man, Wu is the park's chief geneticist. Obviously brilliant in his field, Wu's astounding ignorance about the biology of the animals he's making proves disastrous. He unknowingly engineers some of the all-female dinosaurs with the ability to switch their sex (frog DNA'll do that to you, apparently). Faced with overwhelming evidence that the animals are breeding, Wu refuses to see reason, dismissing the possibility because his own awesomeness couldn't possibly allow it to happen. His own awesomeness, unfortunately, doesn't prevent him from getting slashed to death by Velociraptors.
A third-generation fireman who suddenly realizes the emptiness of his life and starts to search for meaning in the books he is supposed to be burning. Though he is sometimes rash and has a hard time thinking for himself, he is determined to break free from the oppression of ignorance. He quickly forms unusually strong attachments with anyone who seems receptive to true friendship. His biggest regret in life is not having a better relationship with his wife.
Guy Montag The protagonist, an unhappy, complacent man who is thirty years old. He has been a fireman for ten years. He meets Clarisse and finds that her outlook on life is refreshing.
Jonathan is the first character we meet in the novel, but he's hardly the most interesting. (Want proof? Keanu Reeves played him in Bram Stoker's Dracula. Okay: That's not totally fair... but Keanu Reeves never changes.) Whenever he shares a scene with another character, he tends to be upstaged. Dr. Seward describes him as a "quiet, business-like gentleman," "uncommonly clever," and "full of energy" (17.41), but that's about all we hear about the young lawyer. The other men often feel sorry for Jonathan because his wife, Mina, is one of Dracula's victims. And while Jonathan is brave enough to be the first to jump out at make a stab at Dracula, he's also the least experienced of the men at fighting or hunting. After all, the guy is a lawyer—he's spent most of his life studying and working various desk jobs. He doesn't have Quincey's experience hunting buffalo on the prairie in America, or Arthur's experience hunting foxes on the English countryside, or even Dr. Seward's experience wrestling with homicidal maniacs in an asylum. He speaks several foreign languages and can tell you more than you wanted to know about the English legal system, but that's about it. Overall, he's pretty ordinary... just your average middle-class English guy. Brave when he has to be, but otherwise pretty quiet. Maybe Stoker wanted to have an average character to balance out the eccentric, extraordinary characters like Van Helsing.
Jonathan Harker The young London solicitor who is sent to Transylvania to finalize the transfer of real estate in England to Count Dracula. His journals record the essential facts of his journey from Bistritz to the Borgo Pass, where he is met by Count Dracula's carriage, as well as recording the facts of his arrival and stay at the Castle Dracula. Harker is engaged to a young schoolmistress named Mina Murray.
A solicitor, or lawyer, whose firm sends him to Transylvania to conclude a real estate transaction with Dracula. Young and naïve, Harker quickly finds himself a prisoner in the castle and barely escapes with his life. He demonstrates a fierce curiosity to discover the true nature of his captor and a strong will to escape. Later, after becoming convinced that the count has moved to London, Harker emerges as a brave and fearless fighter.
Mulch is a pretty big deal in the novel because he's the fairies' way into Fowl Manor and the reason they know about Artemis's copy of the Book—but Mulch is also just a tool in fairy hands for the time being. He shows up when they need him and then gets rewarded with... well... slightly less jail time. Woo hoo. Mulch, like many of the other characters, is a thief. He appears to take great pleasure in his work too, from his tendency to giggle gleefully while stealing from unsuspecting people like the LEP (9.332). Out of everyone, Mulch is probably the character that would identify most with Artemis, though Artemis is far more ruthless, since his main goals are to get rich and live free. Unlike Artemis, however, Mulch seems to have boundaries, since he steals two dozen gold bars from the LEP ransom stash instead of making grand plans to take the entire hovertrolley. He might be a kleptomaniac, but Mulch also only takes what he can carry.
The protagonist and narrator of the novel. David is innocent, trusting, and naïve even though he suffers abuse as a child. He is idealistic and impulsive and remains honest and loving. Though David’s troubled childhood renders him sympathetic, he is not perfect. He often exhibits chauvinistic attitudes toward the lower classes. In some instances, foolhardy decisions mar David’s good intentions.
David Copperfield He is the central character in the novel and tells the story of his life from birth to adulthood. David is a sensitive youth who first suffers under the cruel Murdstones and then is sent away to work in a wine warehouse. David first marries Dora Spenlow, an empty-headed young girl; afterward, he realizes how incompatible they really are. When Dora dies, he marries Agnes Wickfield and by the novel's end, he has matured into a successful writer and adult.
An Efrafan doe. Hyzenthlay is intelligent and caring and she helps Bigwig free the other does. She can sometimes see special things like Fiver can, and she mates with Holly and bears the second litter in the new warren.
A shy, sensitive boy in the group. Simon, in some ways the only naturally “good” character on the island, behaves kindly toward the younger boys and is willing to work for the good of their community. Moreover, because his motivation is rooted in his deep feeling of connectedness to nature, Simon is the only character whose sense of morality does not seem to have been imposed by society. Simon represents a kind of natural goodness, as opposed to the unbridled evil of Jack and the imposed morality of civilization represented by Ralph and Piggy.
The first time we see Simon, he's fainting, and things go downhill from there. From passing out to throwing up to hallucinating to getting bloody noses, Simon is a walking mess. But he's anything but weak.
Jack's a lot like Ennis in a lot of ways, since they're both "high school dropout country boys with no prospects, brought up to hard work and privation, both rough-mannered, rough-spoken, inured to the stoic life." (3) He fits the stereotypical cowboys role to a T—even riding rodeos—but for the fact that
A passionate, emotional ranch worker. Jack was raised on a humble ranch and has little money, although he is obsessed with the glitzy rodeo lifestyle. Though he is in love with Ennis, he marries Lureen and has a son. On the side, however, Jack has affairs and travels to Mexico to have sex with male prostitutes. He tries to coax Ennis into building a life together, but Ennis resists. Ultimately, Jack dies in a freak roadside accident that is more likely a violent murder.
Has a kindly face set in an expression of "placid stupidity." Hildegarde is rather slow-minded and unquestioningly carries out the ugly Princess's orders. Hildegarde pretends to be Princess Dragomiroff's maid, but is truly the Armstrong's cook.
Stilgar is the head honcho of Sietch Tibr, and he's the Fremen who originally accepts Jessica and Paul into Fremen society. In many ways, Stilgar is a knight archetype like Gurney. His skills and loyalty cause Paul to refer to him as "[his] right arm" (44.249). He also employs intelligence and cunning on more than one occasion, leading even Jessica to admire him as a "man who weighs his decisions, who thinks of consequences" (32.61). But unlike Gurney, Stilgar becomes consumed by the religion and mythology surrounding Muad'Dib. Even Paul is saddened by how "Stilgar [has] been transformed from the Fremen naib to a creature of the Lisan al-Gaib, a receptacle for awe and obedience" (48.56). Stilgar changes from a friend and teacher to Paul (like Gurney) to becoming Paul's worshipper, a religious knight who can no longer think for himself.
Kehaar is our favorite type of rabbit: the seagull type. Kehaar is the black-headed seagull that Hazel's rabbits befriend. Kehaar shows up on their doorstep wounded and unhappy. But as the narrator tells us, these gulls are "gregarious", meaning social. So it makes sense for Kehaar to join up with the rabbits, even though he's, well, a bird. Kehaar becomes an unofficial member of the warren, promising to come back to visit in the winters (40.15). Which is a good thing since he's pretty much the entire air force for Watership Down. Generally speaking, Kehaar is very useful for Hazel (and the story) because he finds out where other rabbits live (both at the farm and at Efrafa) and he helps fight off Woundwort during the raid. But he also comes in handy for two other reasons: (1) He proves Hazel correct in his crazy idea to befriend non-rabbit animals. (But notice that this idea is both (a) inventive and (b) traditional, since there's a whole El-ahrairah story that Bluebell tells about this very idea, "The Trial of El-ahrairah.") This is useful because it shows us that Hazel is always right (as long as he's listening to Fiver). (2) Kehaar is also a bit of comic relief, what with his Norwegian-ish accent that turns "mother" into "mudder," etc. (If you like accents, that's comic gold. Also, Richard Adams notes in his introduction to the book that he based Kehaar on a Norwegian resistance fighter.) That may be silly comedy, but in a book with this much blood and death, we'll take what we can get.
The bird whom Hazel tells the rabbits to help. Kehaar becomes a good friend of Bigwig's. He is strong and knowledgeable and helps the rabbits numerous times, explaining to them about things they had never seen before.
A world-renowned big-game hunter and the story’s protagonist. Intelligent, experienced, and level-headed, Rainsford uses his wits and physical prowess to outwit General Zaroff. His understanding of civilization and the relationship between hunter and prey is radically transformed during his harrowing days on the island. Hiding from Zaroff, he recalls his days fighting in the trenches of World War I, where he witnessed unimaginable violence. At the same time, the three-day chase reverses his life of privilege and ease, forcing him to sacrifice comfort and luxury to survive.
This is one protagonist who learns a lesson—or does he? Rainsford starts out like a big macho man, a real Teddy-Roosevelt-posing-with-a-hippo. By the end, he's a frightened animal. But how much does he really change?
One of the novel's two protagonists, Mary Lennox is a ten-year-old girl who, after the death of her parents in India, is sent to live with her uncle in Yorkshire, England. Mary changes drastically over the course of : she evolves from a spoiled, unloved and unloving creature to a girl who is full of spirit and surrounded by friends. She begins the book as its central character, but is later displaced by Colin.
Mary Lennox is a Grade-A, no-holds-barred brat. And the thing about this analysis of Mary's character is that it doesn't take a lot of reading between the lines. We're not throwing out some wild theory about who Mary Lennox is at the beginning of The Secret Garden. Nope, Frances Hodgson Burnett comes right out and tells us in the first paragraph of the novel that Mary is: […] as tyrannical and selfish a little pig as ever lived. (1.1) It's a rare main character that the narrator of the book seems to dislike as much or more than we, the readers, do. But there you have it: Mary Lennox is the most selfish pig that has ever lived, according to her creator. So why are we reading about her? We're reading about Mary to see what might make her a less tyrannical and selfish little pig. After all, that first paragraph doesn't just tell us that Mary is so terrible to her governesses that none of them stick around for longer than three months. It also tells us that Mary's mother hadn't wanted kids, and that she basically handed baby Mary over to a string of bullied servants with the instruction to "keep the child [Mary] out of sight as much as possible" (1.1). In other words, Mary wasn't born a self-centered monster; she became one through her neglected upbringing. So The Secret Garden is at least partly the story of a lonely, selfish girl meeting friends—Dickon, Ben Weatherstaff, the robin, and even Colin Craven—and taking care of a garden. As she gets to know other people—people who haven't been paid by her mother to keep her quiet and out of sight—she becomes less of a pig and more of an actual, generous human being. On the one hand, sure, Mary's care for the Secret Garden and especially for Colin Craven totally transforms her into a much nicer kind of character. But oddly enough, it also lessens her place in the novel overall. Mary is definitely the main character in the first thirteen chapters of The Secret Garden, before Colin makes his surprise entrance. But the second half of the book focuses primarily on Colin's efforts to learn to walk, to investigate Magic, and to reunite with his absent father. In short, once Mary stops misbehaving, the book pretty much stops paying attention to her. Maybe she should have kept those tantrums going for a little while longer.
A dwarf who leads his fellow dwarves on a trip to the Lonely Mountain to reclaim their treasure from Smaug. Smaug’s bounty is Thorin’s inheritance, as it belonged to Thror, Thorin’s grandfather, the great King under the Mountain. Thorin is a proud, purposeful, and sturdy warrior, if a bit stubborn at times. As the novel progresses, his inability to formulate successful plans, his greed, and his reliance on Bilbo to save him at every turn make Thorin a somewhat unappealing figure, but he is partly redeemed by the remorse he shows before he dies.
Athos Wounded when d'Artagnan first meets him, Athos will later prove to be the person who wrote his memoirs about these adventurers. He is the most aristocratic of the three musketeers and also the oldest, but d'Artagnan feels closer to Athos than to the other two. Long before Athos reveals that he is the young nobleman who married the wicked Milady (Lady de Winter) during his youth, d'Artagnan is deeply impressed by him. Athos's real name is Count de La Fere.
Al is Harry and Ginny's middle child, named in honor of both Albus Dumbledore and Severus Snape. In the Epilogue, Al is nervously heading off to his first year at Hogwarts. In many ways, he seems like a miniature Harry, or like the Harry we first met in Harry Potter and the Sorcerer's Stone. Al's anxiousness about Sorting also gives us an opportunity to see how much Harry has grown – he assures Al that he'll be proud of him whether he ends up in Gryffindor or Slytherin, or in any other house that fits him best.
The son of George and Hazel Bergeron. Fourteen years old and seven feet tall, Harrison seems to be the most advanced model the human species can produce. He is a genius who is also absurdly strong, a dancer who can also break out of prison, and a self-proclaimed emperor. If Harrison can’t succeed in overthrowing the government, Vonnegut suggests, no one can. Harrison’s assassination on live television means that the last, best hope of Americans has failed and there is no longer any chance of escaping the laws of equality.
For someone bearing the same name as the title of the story, you'd think we'd see more of Harrison. As it is, we only see him for roughly a quarter of the story—and we're never even in the same room with him (so to speak). But that's okay with us, because what we do see is kind of scary.
For the main character, Charlie sure doesn't do much. Sure, he's the center of the story at the beginning – and again at the end – but for the meat of the book, he's doesn't get a lot of screen time. Or does he? He doesn't stand out by, say, turning into a giant blueberry, but he is always there, along for the ride. And throughout the story, even when he's not talking, he's showing his true colors.
The protagonist of the novel. Charlie is unassuming and respectful toward everyone in his life. He is undernourished but refuses to ever take an extra portion of food because it would deprive another member of his family. He must walk by Mr. Wonka’s factory every day on his way to school and smell the tantalizing smell of chocolate as his stomach grumbles. He is almost always cold because he does not have an adequate jacket. Even though he has every reason to complain, he never does. Charlie is exactly the kind of child that Mr. Wonka wants.
Gimli Son of Glóin, a dwarf of the Lonely Mountain. A member of the Fellowship. Close friend of Legolas the elf and companion of Aragorn. He falls in love with Galadriel.
When Peeta Mellark is selected as the tribute for District 12, all we really know about him is that he's a baker's son, a little bit emotional (3.47) – and that Katniss really wishes he hadn't been the one chosen as her co-tribute (2.23). Over the course of the novel, though, we learn that he played a large part in helping Katniss's family survive after her father's death. For this, Katniss feels deeply indebted to him. Peeta is also totally and completely in love with Katniss Everdeen. Peeta's character serves, at times, as a contrast to Katniss's. Whereas she is a provider and a survivor, Peeta is just the opposite: he's not much of an outdoorsman, is in touch with his soft side, and comes from a world very different from Katniss's. (His family, while they end up eating stale bread, never goes hungry: they are of the more privileged merchant class.) As such, Peeta's character helps develop many of the novel's major themes: love, hope, class, and identity. Let's explore them: Peeta's been in love with Katniss ever since he first saw her back in grade school and heard her singing that catchy valley song. He's the one who instigated the whole romance plot by confessing his feelings for Katniss on camera. As for Peeta, he truly believes in the part he is acting. Peeta is way into all of the kissing and cuddling and love talk. His father, we also find out, had it bad for Katniss's mother. A love of Everdeen women is generational in Peeta's family. His ongoing affections make him a symbol of the hopeless romantic – a role he plays exceedingly well both on and off camera. His feelings for Katniss capture the audience's heart (and some of the readers' as well), attesting to the power of romance and its attendant narratives. While Katniss means everything to Peeta, let's not forget that he also means something very important to her. Not exactly love, no. Still, we learn from Katniss that in her eyes Peeta symbolizes hope. He is, after all, the one who helped save her family from starvation by giving her loaves of bread when she was a child (2.48). Peeta's kindness probably saved the lives of Katniss and her family. This means that, while Katniss is grateful to Peeta, she also feels an uncomfortable sense of obligation to him for his kindness and generosity. Katniss associates Peeta with dandelions: the flower that she and Prim used as food after her father died (2.58). Katniss mentions that, again, this all has to do with hope. But how else might Peeta be like a dandelion to Katniss? Peeta's family lives in District 12, but they are not coal miners. Rather, Peeta's family – his sweet father and unpalatable mother – are bakers. His parents' occupation puts Peeta one rung up above Katniss on the class ladder (though still far below the citizens of the Capitol). This might seem to be a rather small difference, but Peeta's class perspective very much shapes the way he sees the world. Katniss explains: It's not that Peeta's soft exactly, and he's proved he's not a coward. But there are things you don't question too much, I guess, when your home always smells like baking bread, whereas Gale questions everything. (22.57) Peeta has, perhaps, a different view of political matters than Katniss and Gale. What else might he see differently because of his class privilege? While Peeta's relationship to Katniss is very important for the novel, his character is also significant in that he is one of the tributes who considers what his identity means in the scope of the Hunger Games. As he tells Katniss as the Games approach, he doesn't just want to be a pawn in the Capitol's game. He wants to "die as himself" (10.70). For Peeta, it is important that the Capitol knows that they don't own him. We should also remember, though, that much of Peeta's reflection on himself has to do with the fact that, unlike Katniss, he is not of the survivalist mindset. Instead, Peeta contemplates the Big Questions. This all makes Katniss feel kind of small: While I've been ruminating on the availability of trees, Peeta has been struggling with how to maintain his identity. His purity of self. (10.71) Katniss may feel guilty about her focus on survival strategies for the big day, but we could also always argue that, since Peeta has no duties or obligations to his self-sufficient family (the survival of others doesn't depend on his own), he has the time and resources for self-reflection.
the boy tribute of District 12 and the son of a baker. He is kind and loyal, and he becomes Katniss’s love interest and main ally during the Hunger Games.
The young leader of the rabbits, and Fiver's brother. As the rabbits flee their home warren, Hazel guides them through all of their difficulties. He thinks quickly and imaginatively, frequently putting himself at risk in order to protect the other rabbits. Hazel wins the unfailing loyalty of the other rabbits and uses the best of each of them to help the group.
Fern is a little girl who grows up right before our eyes. (We gab about growing up in the "Coming of Age" theme. Go check it out and then join us back here.) Seriously, during the course of the novel, she goes from a bona fide kid to a—well, we're thinking the technical word for it is "tween." Let's break it down:
Frodo Baggins A young well-to-do hobbit. When he discovers that the magic ring left to him by his eccentric "Uncle" Bilbo is the One Ring, he reluctantly takes on the quest to destroy it. Often referred to as the Ringbearer.
While this may be a story about the love between Ennis and Jack, Ennis is our main man. Why's that? Well, to out it frankly, it's because he's the only one of the two main characters who isn't dead at the end of the story. And that's kind of the point. Sure, he and Jack are both "high school dropout country boys with no prospects, brought up to hard work and privation, both rough-mannered, rough-spoken, inured to the stoic life." (3) Those surface similarities, however, hide deep-set differences that explain why Ennis ends the story alive and Jack doesn't.
A rough-mannered, paycheck-to-paycheck ranch worker. Ennis’s parents died in an auto accident when he was young, and he was raised by his older brother and sister. Although he falls in love with Jack Twist during their summer on Brokeback Mountain, he marries Alma Beers and has two daughters. Ennis is a stoic who, mired in the life he has made for himself, allows himself only stolen glimpses of the happy life he and Jack could have had with each other if circumstances had been different.
Beowulf A mighty warrior and noble individual, the poem's hero, with the strength of 30 in his hand-grip, comes to the aid of Hrothgar's Danes. Later Beowulf is king of the Geats.
Faster than a sea monster! Stronger than a demon! More powerful than a dragon! It's… Beowulf, a medieval Geatish warrior willing to take on any challenge in order to make a name for himself. We first meet Beowulf as he sails, leading a group of Geatish warriors, to the land of the Spear-Danes, where he offers his services to King Hrothgar. Beowulf battles two demons, first the man-eating Grendel, then Grendel's bereaved mother, defending the Danes from these vicious killers. After returning to Geatland and nobly refusing to steal the throne when his uncle King Hygelac dies, Beowulf ends up becoming king anyway after Hygelac's son, Heardred, is killed in battle. Beowulf reigns for fifty years, striking terror into the hearts of neighboring tribes and protecting his people from all enemies—until, one day, a thief wakes a dragon, and Geatland faces its most dire threat yet. If all this is sounding like it would make an excellent action-adventure film, then we'd like to assure you that it's already been made into one—several, in fact. Check out the "Best of the Web" section for a list of the most interesting ones.
The protagonist of the epic, Beowulf is a Geatish hero who fights the monster Grendel, Grendel’s mother, and a fire-breathing dragon. Beowulf’s boasts and encounters reveal him to be the strongest, ablest warrior around. In his youth, he personifies all of the best values of the heroic culture. In his old age, he proves a wise and effective ruler.
Ponyboy Michael Curtis A 14-year-old boy who is the narrator and main character in The Outsiders. His parents have been killed in an automobile accident, and he lives with his two brothers. The Outsiders
The pig who challenges Napoleon for control of Animal Farm after the Rebellion. Based on Leon Trotsky, Snowball is intelligent, passionate, eloquent, and less subtle and devious than his counterpart, Napoleon. Snowball seems to win the loyalty of the other animals and cement his power.
Buck’s final master, a gold hunter experienced in the ways of the Klondike. Thornton saves Buck from death at the hands of Hal, and Buck rewards Thornton with fierce loyalty. Thornton’s relationship to Buck is the ideal man-dog relationship: each guards the other’s back and is completely devoted to the other. The strength of their bond is enough to keep Buck from acting on the forces he feels are calling him into the wild.
Carlisle Cullen is an incredibly handsome, conscientious, morally-sound doctor. As patriarch of the Cullen clan, Carlisle started the whole "vegetarian" (no-human) diet. Carlisle is a vampire with a conscience. As a human in the 17th century, Carlisle was the son of an ardently anti-"evil-being" (witches, vampires, werewolves, etc.) pastor. Carlisle followed in his father's footsteps and hunted and killed these "monsters." While chasing down a vampire, Carlisle was bitten. After hiding in a pile of rotting potatoes while he underwent his painful transformation into a vampire, Carlisle realized what had happened to him. Horrified at what he had become, he tried for years to kill himself, but nothing seemed to harm him. Eventually, Carlisle reached a sort of peace with himself when he decided to hunt only animals. He gained enough self-control that he could even handle being around human blood, and eventually became a doctor. An outsider among vampires because of his diet, Carlisle, like the Pilgrims that settled in New England, traveled to America to start a new life. Just as Carlisle has rules about his diet, he also has a set of rules regarding creating new vampires: he will only transform people who are about to die and have no other option. When the human Edward was about to die of Spanish influenza, Carlisle transformed him. He also saved his wife Esme, Rosalie, and Emmett. One of Carlisle's most important characteristics is his compassion, and when he transforms someone into a vampire, he's sure to look after him or her.We're not sure if Stephenie Meyer had this in mind when designing Carlisle's character, but we find it interesting to consider is how Dr. Carlisle Cullen and Dr. Victor Frankenstein from Mary Shelley's Frankenstein stack up next to each other. Both men create "monsters," but the primary difference between them lies in how they treat their creations. Dr. Frankenstein is horrified by the monster he's made and abandons it. Carlisle, on the other hand, invites his creations into his home and treats them as family. In fact, we find out from Edward that to abandon a vampire you've created is considered unethical, at least by the Cullens. Alice was alone when she woke up a vampire, and the Cullens are amazed that she didn't become a "total savage" (14.44) as a result. Interestingly, in contrast, Dr. Frankenstein did abandon his monster, and the monster did become a "total savage."As you might expect, Dr. Cullen is a family man, and he's open to expanding his family. When James, Victoria, and Laurent show up in the middle of the Cullen baseball game, Carlisle introduces his family, and includes Bella among them.
More than anything, Leslie's defined by her imagination and sense of adventure. She's open and ready for anything: ready to move to a new town and make new friends, to try new things, to create something where nothing existed before. Even though moving to Lark Creek was hard on her, she wanted to do it to support her parents.Because of her reading and the way she was brought up, Leslie is able to use her imagination and creativity, bolstered by her friendship with Jess, to get outside of Lark Creek. Terabithia is her idea: "I know" – she was getting excited – "it could be a magic country like Narnia, and the only way you can get in is by swinging across on this enchanted rope." (4.102)She's the one who sees magic in the ordinary, sees Terabithia where there's just a forest, and is the one who helps Jess see those things too.We know what Jess's ambitions are, but we don't really know Leslie's. In fact, we never learn as much about her as we do about Jess, or about what Jess thinks about her. We do know she loves stories – reading them, telling them, and making them up. The girl's curious, she genuinely wants to know things, and she's a "beautiful" (3.87), naturally fast runner. But we don't really know what she wants to be when she grows up, or what drives her she's had a hard time, with only "one and one-half friends," Jess and Janice (7.111). In fact, without Jess, we can bet her year in Lark Creek would've been pretty miserable. Her father later thanks Jess "for being such a wonderful friend to her" (12.13), and tells him "she loved [him]" (12.13).Jess always thinks of Leslie as full of courage when he is afraid. When he asks her if she's frightened of Janice Avery, it's mainly because the thought of her getting frightened is incredible: "he didn't mean it in a daring way, he was just dumbfounded by the idea of Leslie being scared" (7.70). There are two things to take from this. First, Jess has important things to teach Leslie too, like feeling compassion for scary enemies or "predators." He helps her to stretch her mind just as she stretched his. Second, sometimes being too brave can be foolish or tragic. Because Leslie doesn't feel or recognize fear when the creek to Terabithia is overfilling with rushing water, she makes the overconfident leap of trying to cross it by herself.Leslie changes Jess's life, there's no question about that. Yet even when she's gone, she's still present for Jess and is still helping him grow into a better, more noble person – a person worthy of Terabithia:It was Leslie who had taken him from the cow pasture into Terabithia and turned him into a king. […] hadn't Leslie, even in Terabithia, tried to push back the walls of his mind and make him see beyond to the shining world – huge and terrible and beautiful and very fragile? (13.59)Leslie's gift was that she knew that "shining world," in all its terror and glory, joy and heartbreak, was out there, waiting for them, and she was able to "make [Jess] see beyond to" it. We can only imagine what she herself saw and what else she would have been able to learn, and to teach, had she lived.
Jess's new next-door neighbor and best friend. Highly intelligent and imaginative, it is her idea to build a fantasyland named Terabithia across the creek. Leslie's family is affluent and well educated, in stark contrast with the rest of the residents in the area, and has an entirely different slant on life than any of the neighbors. All this influences Leslie as well and helps to develop her uniqueness and distinct flair.
Hazel's brother. Fiver is small and awkward, but he sees things that no other rabbits see. His sixth sense saves the rabbits many times, and they learn to always seek his opinion. Fiver offers advice to Hazel throughout the entire journey, although he always does so in a way that does not undermine his brother's leadership.
For a man who was born 70 years old, Benjamin seems to be doing pretty well. The narrator tells us right off the bat that he is "by nature obliging" (1.3.7), and we see this in the way Benjamin responds to his father’s absurd demands that he shake a rattle periodically, dye his hair brown, go to Kindergarten, and so forth. In fact, part of the reason we root for Benjamin as a protagonist is that he’s so intent on making others – particularly his father – happy.What makes Benjamin’s case all the more curious is the way people react to his reverse aging. They seem to think it’s his fault, and they insists that he change it, immediately. This is part of the humor of "Benjamin Button," but it’s also part of the story’s satire. Everyone resents Benjamin for being different, as though being different is necessarily wrong and necessarily a choice.
Goldblum—sorry, Ian Malcolm—is a mathematician from Texas who wears all black, all the time, and has a rather dismal outlook on the prospects of Hammond's big project. He's calculated that the park will fail—because you can't play God, and you can't control nature—and he isn't shy about reminding Hammond about it. While relatively young—he's 35 and yes that's young—Malcolm has gained fame as a proponent of chaos theory, an emerging field in mathematics. "I do maths," he says, introducing himself. His theory tells him that Jurassic Park cannot work long-term. Its system is too unpredictable, too uncontrollable. "It is an accident waiting to happen," he says (2.14.61). Malcolm turns out to be right—and he never stops telling us so. After he's seriously injured and injected with morphine, he turns very philosophical, sort of becoming the mouthpiece for Crichton's own criticisms of scientists. Scientists, says Malcolm, are too focused on accomplishing something grand and are not focused enough on the responsibility they have for the harm they cause. They care too much for what they can do and not enough for what they should do. "Science, like other outmoded systems, is destroying itself," he says. "As it gains power, it proves itself incapable of handling the power" (5.47.208). Malcolm believes that science promised the power of total control, but events in the twentieth century shattered that promise. Science gives power, but it can't tell you how you should use that power. Science isn't morality. Malcolm compares it to inherited wealth: it's attained "without discipline" and "no mastery" (5.47.106), since so much of the work was done in the past, and now you can often just build on that. Progress comes quickly, but disaster follows sooner or later. Malcolm reportedly dies at the end of the book, but Crichton brought him back in the sequel, The Lost World. He's arguably the most interesting character in the novel, but more because of his antagonistic philosophizing than because of who he is.
Elrond An elf; the proprietor of the Last Homely House at the Edge of Wild and is a leader of the elves. He translates the runes on the swords taken from the trolls to reveal that they were originally used in the Goblin-wars and translates the moon-letters on Thorin's map to reveal the importance of Durin's Day.
The great leader of the elves at Rivendell. Elrond gives Bilbo’s group aid and helpful advice when they pass through Rivendell early in the novel. He is described in Chapter as being “as strong as a warrior, as wise as a wizard, as venerable as a king of dwarves, and as kind as summer.”
A journalist, publisher of the political magazine , and the protagonist of the novel. Ethical, earnest, and a little naïve, Blomkvist accepts a freelance job to solve the mystery of Harriet Vanger’s disappearance in order to restore his good name after a libel conviction threatens his journalistic career and the future of his magazine.
White Fang This dog is actually three-fourths wolf and one part dog. He possesses all of the intelligence of the dog family, along with the quickness and the slyness of the wolf family. From his very first weeks, White Fang proves that he is the strongest of the litter; he survives a famine that kills his brothers and sisters. Later, he gains a reputation for being one of the most savage dogs in the North. However, under the tutelage of a gentle master, White Fang eventually develops into a civilized animal.
We follow White Fang throughout the whole novel, from before he's even conceived right up to his happily ever after (which he earns about ten times more than any other hero you'll ever read). London puts us right in his wolfy skull for a lot of it and we can see the huge changes he goes through over the course of his life. Plus, London handily points out the lessons he learns along the way, so we understand just why we should care about this furry little creature. And it's not just because his name's the title of the book.
Mr. Brunner is Percy's favorite teacher, and teaches Latin. Later, Percy realizes that Mr. Brunner is Chiron, a very smart centaur who has trained many heroes before Percy's time, including Hercules. At Yancy Academy, Chiron helps Percy learn about Ancient Greece (the history of the gods and the Titans). He tells Percy, "what you learn from me […] is vitally important. I expect you to treat it as such. I will accept only the best from you, Percy Jackson" (1.66). Percy describes Mr. Brunner/Chiron for us: Mr. Brunner was this middle-aged guy in a motorized wheelchair. He had thinning hair and a scruffy beard and a frayed tweed jacket, which always smelled like coffee. You wouldn't think he'd be cool, but he told stories and jokes and let us play games in class. He also had this collection of Roman armor and weapons, so he was the only teacher whose class didn't put me to sleep. (1.14)On Percy's first day at Camp Half-Blood, he realizes that Mr. Brunner's name is actually Chiron and he has the body of a horse. He helps Mr. D run Camp Half-Blood, training young demi-gods for a life of battling monsters. Chiron tells Percy that he inserted himself at Yancy as a Latin teacher, because he wanted to watch over Percy and because he had a suspicion that Percy was a big deal.Chiron is very wise. His whole job is to help train demi-gods for the work of a hero. He pushes Percy hard in Latin class and beyond, setting high expectations for him. Chiron is also really good at interpreting the Oracle's prophecies, helping Percy understand his own prophecy.
Winston, the novel's protagonist, is staunchly against the Party. He finds unobtrusive methods to rebel, or at least he believes them to go unnoticed. He main desire is to remain human under inhuman circumstances.
A minor member of the ruling Party in near-future London, Winston Smith is a thin, frail, contemplative, intellectual, and fatalistic thirty-nine-year-old. Winston hates the totalitarian control and enforced repression that are characteristic of his government. He harbors revolutionary dreams.
The Royal Bengal tiger with whom Pi shares his lifeboat. His captor, Richard Parker, named him Thirsty, but a shipping clerk made a mistake and reversed their names. From then on, at the Pondicherry Zoo, he was known as Richard Parker. Weighing pounds and about nine feet long, he kills the hyena on the lifeboat and the blind cannibal. With Pi, however, Richard Parker acts as an omega, or submissive, animal, respecting Pi’s dominance.
Depending on which of Pi's stories you believe, Richard Parker is either a real tiger...or he's simply a very developed figment of Pi's imagination. But whichever one you choose – the story with animals, the story without—we think it's illuminating to at least entertain the possibility that Richard Parker is nothing more than an imaginative extension of Pi. While also, of course, considering the possibility that Richard Parker is nothing more than a crazy big tiger on a lifeboat. And if your brain melts trying to believe in both stories at the same time, we apologize.
The first thing we learn about Jess is his ambition to be "the best runner of the fourth and fifth grades" (4.2). And that's what drives him for the first several chapters of the book – being the fastest and best runner. It's something he can improve if he works really hard, that will make people proud of him, that's totally accepted in his society, and that will be seen as masculine – all pretty important things for a kid who feels like a bit of an outcast. But while he might have some ability, Jess just isn't naturally the fastest runner: he has to work really hard at it. When Leslie comes along, she easily beats him and all the others, and for all we know she never trained at it.Jess's other, more secret ambition is to become a good artist. He has to draw because he can't help it. The encouragement of his teacher Miss Edmunds seems to be counterbalanced by his father's total disapproval. But with Leslie in his life, Jess seems to have enough permission to want to draw and to draw better. As he's talking with his new friend, "he yearned to reach out and capture the quivering life about him [but] when he tried, it slipped past his fingertips, leaving a dry fossil upon the page" (4.111). Leslie's the one who helps him see "the poetry of the trees" (4.111). With her in his life, he's able to fantasize about a career as an artist, and to start to shape a future outside of Lark Creek and beyond his parents' expectations.Obviously Jess's friendship with Leslie alters him tremendously. For being a mere fifth grader, she really teaches him to be more courageous, more imaginative, and more thoughtful. Because he has her in his life, he can exercise his generosity and become more fully himself. He "need[s] to give her something" (6.6). His friendship with her makes up for the things that are lacking in his family life (6.23), and, just as she would be alienated without him, he would be "lonesome" without her. He's "able to be Leslie's one whole friend in the world as she [i]s his" (7.112).At first Jess feels like an interloper (an intruder – not someone who runs off to get married) at Terabithia. He thinks he can't even get there without Leslie because it won't feel transformed: "It needed Leslie to make the magic" (7.2). But by the time he goes to the National Gallery with Miss Edmunds, he's starting to see the outside world the way Leslie taught him to see Terabithia: "Entering the gallery was like stepping inside the pine grove [… it was] so obviously a sacred place" (10.53). He's becoming able to see the Terabithian aspects of the ordinary world, to "make the magic" (7.2) for himself.When Leslie is abruptly taken from him, Jess is completely devastated. He goes through several stages of grief, including blaming her for helping him open his mind like that: She had tricked him. She had made him leave his old self behind and come into her world, and then before he was really at home in it but too late to go back, she had left him stranded there. (12.17)And it's true that she did leave him there far too early. There was more she could teach him, and more he could teach her. The world is a lesser place without Leslie in it, but Jess is richer for having known her at all.
The grim human who is the honorable captain of the guard in Lake Town, a human city built on Long Lake just south of the Lonely Mountain. With the help of information discovered by Bilbo and related by a thrush, Bard finds Smaug’s weak spot and kills him.
A "barrel-chested, bearded man of forty," Dr. Alan Grant is a professor of paleontology at the University of Denver. He sees himself "as an outdoorsman," believing "all the important work in paleontology" is "done outdoors, with your hands" (2.6.38). With Ellie Sattler, he digs for dinosaur bones in Montana. He receives funding from the Hammond Foundation, hence his participation in the assessment of Hammond's park. Like his film counterpart, Grant doesn't get along with computers, but unlike his movie version, he loves kids. "It was impossible not to like any group so openly enthusiastic about dinosaurs." Even more: "Grant used to watch kids in museums as they stared openmouthed at the big skeletons riding above them" (3.20.57). So Grant's actually a pretty suitable guide for Hammond's grandkids when the dinosaurs escape. With skill and sympathy, he leads them through the dangers of the park and finally to safety. He chats with Tim about their personal lives, and he carries Lex even though she's the least injured of the three. He asks both children what they feel they can do. When they have to climb a fence and Tim's fear of heights becomes apparent, Grant patiently talks him through it. Grant also has the expertise to evade prowling prehistoric hunters and to trick a bunch of raptors into eating poisoned eggs. Then, when everyone is safe, he takes it upon himself to find the raptor nest, enter it, and count the creatures so that he and the others will have a better sense of the damage. His sense of wonder also calls him. "He's thought about this for his whole life," Sattler says of him (7.53.113). Grant is probably the main protagonist of the novel. If he doesn't have the moral authority exerted by Ian Malcolm, he does the most to keep people alive once the terrible lizards run amok, and he feels the greatest sense of responsibility for the dinosaurs now that they exist. Unlike many of the scientists in the novel, Grant remains firmly rooted in the real world, which means that he's always aware that his actions have consequences.
Huck Finn means a lot of different things to a lot of different people. Most of the adults in St. Petersburg think he's a menace to society; he's "cordially hated and dreaded by all the mothers in town" (6.43). The kids, on the other hand, wish "they dared to be like him" (6.43). Huck is happy to accompany Tom on almost any adventure, but here's the thing: Huck, despite his reputation, never really has much of a say. He agrees to go to Jackson's Island and he helps look for treasure, but it isn't until the very end of The Adventures of Tom Sawyer – when he goes to the Welshman for help – that Huck really comes out of his shell.So who is the real Huck? He certainly doesn't seem to be the "idle, and lawless, and vulgar and bad" kid the townspeople make him out to be. No, we get a closer look at Huck just after he and Tom have found Injun Joe dead drunk on the floor of the haunted room. After running away to a safe place, the boys say good night to each other:[Tom:] "That's all right. Now, where you going to sleep?"[Huck:] "In Ben Rogers's hayloft. He lets me, and so does his pap's n***** man, Uncle Jake. I tote water for Uncle Jake whenever he wants me to, and any time I ask him he gives me a little something to eat if he can spare it. That's a mighty good n*****, Tom. He likes me, becuz I don't ever act as if I was above him. Sometime I've set right down and eat with him. But you needn't tell that. A body's got to do things when he's awful hungry he wouldn't want to do as a steady thing." (28.31-2)In this one moment, Huck reveals himself to be modest, vulnerable, and caring. He appreciates the help that he is given by Ben Rogers and Uncle Jake, and he does his best to repay the favor by helping to tote water when he can. He is embarrassed to admit that he associates so closely with a slave, but only because there is a social stigma attached. His response to Tom is so bashful and so guileless, it totally dispels the "bad boy" aura that surrounds him.Huck character also develops a bit over the course of the book. He's torn up about the Muff Potter situation, and he's certainly tolerant of his fellow men; he simply has trouble taking action. With Tom's help, he learns to overcome his shyness and act on his virtuous impulses. This is the real Huck, if there is one. This is the Huck who will take Jim down the Mississippi in The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn.
Huck Finn means a lot of different things to a lot of different people. Most of the adults in St. Petersburg think he's a menace to society; he's "cordially hated and dreaded by all the mothers in town" (6.43). The kids, on the other hand, wish "they dared to be like him" (6.43). Huck is happy to accompany Tom on almost any adventure, but here's the thing: Huck, despite his reputation, never really has much of a say. He agrees to go to Jackson's Island and he helps look for treasure, but it isn't until the very end of The Adventures of Tom Sawyer – when he goes to the Welshman for help – that Huck really comes out of his shell.So who is the real Huck? He certainly doesn't seem to be the "idle, and lawless, and vulgar and bad" kid the townspeople make him out to be. No, we get a closer look at Huck just after he and Tom have found Injun Joe dead drunk on the floor of the haunted room. After running away to a safe place, the boys say good night to each other:[Tom:] "That's all right. Now, where you going to sleep?"[Huck:] "In Ben Rogers's hayloft. He lets me, and so does his pap's n***** man, Uncle Jake. I tote water for Uncle Jake whenever he wants me to, and any time I ask him he gives me a little something to eat if he can spare it. That's a mighty good n*****, Tom. He likes me, becuz I don't ever act as if I was above him. Sometime I've set right down and eat with him. But you needn't tell that. A body's got to do things when he's awful hungry he wouldn't want to do as a steady thing." (28.31-2)In this one moment, Huck reveals himself to be modest, vulnerable, and caring. He appreciates the help that he is given by Ben Rogers and Uncle Jake, and he does his best to repay the favor by helping to tote water when he can. He is embarrassed to admit that he associates so closely with a slave, but only because there is a social stigma attached. His response to Tom is so bashful and so guileless, it totally dispels the "bad boy" aura that surrounds him.Huck character also develops a bit over the course of the book. He's torn up about the Muff Potter situation, and he's certainly tolerant of his fellow men; he simply has trouble taking action. With Tom's help, he learns to overcome his shyness and act on his virtuous impulses. This is the real Huck, if there is one. This is the Huck who will take Jim down the Mississippi in The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn.
The son of the town drunk. Huck is a juvenile outcast who is shunned by respectable society and adored by the local boys, who envy his freedom. Like Tom, Huck is highly superstitious, and both boys are always ready for an adventure. Huck gradually replaces Tom’s friend Joe Harper as Tom’s sidekick in his escapades.
The son of the town drunk. Huck is a juvenile outcast who is shunned by respectable society and adored by the local boys, who envy his freedom. Like Tom, Huck is highly superstitious, and both boys are always ready for an adventure. Huck gradually replaces Tom’s friend Joe Harper as Tom’s sidekick in his escapades.
Wilbur is the best pig you're ever going to meet. Plus, he may be the only pig you get to hear talk. (Anyone out there ever heard a pig talk? Anyone? Bueller?) Lucky for us, we get to follow this little guy from his first days on the Arable farm, where he's the runt of the litter, all the way to his days of winning a prize at the county fair.
A powerful dog, half St. Bernard and half sheepdog, who is stolen from a California estate and sold as a sled dog in the Arctic. Buck gradually evolves from a pampered pet into a fierce, masterful animal, able to hold his own in the cruel, kill-or-be-killed world of the North. Though he loves his final master, John Thornton, he feels the wild calling him away from civilization and longs to reconnect with the primitive roots of his species.
Buck This dog is the "main character" of the novel. Buck's father was a huge Saint Bernard, and Buck's mother was a huge Scotch shepherd dog. The central concern of The Call of the Wild is Buck's transformation from a civilized dog of the South to an animal capable of coping with the most adverse conditions in the Far North. Buck is used to illustrate London's idea of the "survival of the fittest" and the retreat to the potential primitive or primordial beast that lies within each animal or individual. This is also a magnification of the philosophy of naturalism, a philosophy which London was often concerned with in his writings. The Call of the Wild
Sophie Hatter is our heroine, the daughter of a well-to-do hat shop owner in the village of Market Chipping in the fantasy land of Ingary. As the eldest of three sisters, Sophie is sure that she is doomed to failure, because that's how fairytales go—just think of Disney's wicked stepsisters in Cinderella. Sophie believes that the youngest sister—in this case, Martha—always wins in this kind of story, and Sophie spends the bulk of Howl's Moving Castle learning to overcome her certainty that she was born a failure by being born first. Sophie's resistance to acknowledging her own power and talent makes her a pretty unusual central character for a fantasy novel. In fact, it's not until Chapter Twelve—a bit past halfway through the novel—that Sophie stops denying that she has magic at all, even though we have seen subtle evidence of her abilities starting in Chapter One. Sophie's lack of self-confidence is actually one of the reasons we like her so much: she has something personal to overcome, which is even more important than her external enemy, the Witch of the Waste. Sophie's internal struggles with herself make her seem three-dimensional and believable as a character, which is more than we can say for Cinderella or Red Riding Hood or the generic kind of beautiful, sweet fairytale heroine that Diana Wynne Jones is clearly contrasting with Sophie.
At first it seems like Neville is an unlikely candidate for Gryffindor even though, like Harry, he's a lonely orphan who's excited to make friends at Hogwarts. He's timid, forgetful, and an easy target for bullies. He's always losing his pet toad and ending up in the wrong place at the wrong time. Poor Neville is an easy mark for the cruelties of Malfoy and his gang. Harry, Ron, and Hermione often help Neville out, even though it sometimes gets them into trouble.Yet Neville is a good, loyal friend who does show courage and bravery, the big traits of Gryffindor house. When McGonagall catches him out of bed in the middle of the night, it's because he's trying to find Harry and warn him that Malfoy is on to him. When he runs into the three friends on their way to breaking the rules and looking for the Sorcerer's Stone, he tries to stop them, for their own good. Neville spends much of the book getting hurt or screwing up – breaking his wrist during flying lessons, being put under the Body-Bind curse by Hermione – but he never gives up. He just keeps muddling through.
Charlotte is Wilbur's best friend. Oh, and she's a spider—specifically, a common barn spider, technical name Araneus cavaticus. (Guess that's where her last name comes from.) But Charlotte isn't just any spider: she's the spider who sticks by Wilbur through thick and thin. And she's the kind of spider who can write words in a web, which is seriously awesome. Finally, she's the spider who does the impossible and saves Wilbur's life. Now that's one amazing eight-legged (and eight-eyed) gal.
Clay is our main man here, our narrator and guide through the frightening world of Hannah Baker's last hours. Much of the action in this story takes place in Clay's head, which means we have some pretty good insight into his character.
The protagonist of . Paul is the son of Duke Leto Atreides and is the heir to the House of the Atreides. At the beginning of the novel, Paul is fifteen years old. He has been trained from birth to fulfill the role of duke, and he is adept at combat and strategic thinking. Paul is also a quiet, thoughtful, and observant young man. Paul is not overly tall or muscular, but he is strong and quick. Among the Fremen, Paul has two names: Usul, which signifies strength, and Muad’Dib, the name of the desert mouse on Arrakis.
Young Dorothy is a bit of a homebody. An orphan who's being raised by her aunt and uncle on the gray plains of Kansas, she's used to leading a quiet existence. But when a cyclone picks up her entire house and deposits it—and her, and her little dog, too!—in an unfamiliar land called Oz, her life gets a lot more exciting. In Oz, Dorothy finds herself chasing around a bunch of flying monkeys and evil witches and hot-air balloons. And you know something? She doesn't need all that drama in her life. All she wants to do is go home. She's not exactly ready for a big adventure, but she's about to get one anyway.
Arnold is the chief engineer at the park, and he's Malcolm's foil. Arnold has his concerns about the park, but he fundamentally disagrees with Malcolm's theoretical objections to the project—and with Malcolm's theorizing in general. A small, nervous man, Arnold goofs big when trying to restore power to the park and reload the computer system. He should have trusted himself a little bit less and actually verified the success of his actions. Like a lot of the book's characters, he gets himself into trouble because he thinks he's in control when he really isn't.
Rick Deckard is a bounty hunter who is about to have one bad day. Within the space of twenty-four hours, he'll have to kill six state-of-the-art androids, have an inter-galactic corporation mess with his mind, meet a metaphysical god twice, and discover an extinct animal. Hope he had a good breakfast.
Sophie is a super smart eight-year-old with a yearning for adventure and a bad habit of being awake during the Witching Hour. She has spent her whole pre-BFG life in various orphanages, because her parents died when she was a baby. The first time we see her, we see her curious, eager to look out the window of her dormitory even though she knows it’s a dangerous time of the night. No wonder she gets herself captured by a giant.
Alice is Edward's adoptive sister and the most supportive of his relationship with Bella because she knows how lonely he has been. When Bella sees Alice for the first time, she describes her as "pixielike, thin in the extreme, with small features. Her hair was deep black, cropped short and pointing in every direction" (1.110), and Bella often comments on how gracefully Alice moves.Unlike the other members of the Cullen family, Alice remembers nothing of her human life – Carlisle and the Cullens found her when she had already been transformed into a vampire. We learn that Alice is unique in that she developed a "conscience" on her own, meaning that without any guidance, she decided against preying on humans. Later we learn from James that Alice was the only human he hunted who got away from him, and that an old vampire transformed her so she'd be safe. Then James killed the old vampire, leaving Alice alone to learn about life as a vampire. We also find out from James that Alice was locked up in an asylum as a human and given shock-treatments, since she had "visions" and her contemporary human beings thought she was insane. Jump to the present, and Alice has a special power: she can see the future – but just what is being planned. In other words, the future can change. Knowing what is "on track" to happen, she can shift choices and actions to prevent that future, if it's undesirable. This occurs when James is planning to kill Bella – Alice sees James's plan, and helps prevent it. Alice sees one possible future that is particularly disturbing to Edward: she sees Bella as a vampire. This is why, during her arguments with Edward over whether she should become a vampire, Bella says, "I'm betting on Alice" (24.287).Alice takes a liking to Bella immediately and treats her like a sister. Not only does Alice take care of Bella while James is hunting her, but Alice also dresses Bella up for the prom. Though Bella isn't so happy about being Alice's "Guinea Pig Barbie," whenever Bella complained, Alice "reminded [Bella] that she didn't have any memories of being human, and asked [Bella] not to ruin her vicarious fun" (Epilogue.8). Overall, Alice is a warm, encouraging, and supportive presence.
Scrooge's long-dead business partner is the first ghostly visitor who haunts him, warning him about the Christmas ghosts soon to come. Marley is your run-of-the-mill worst-case scenario. Why does he come to visit Scrooge before the Christmas ghosts show up? Well, mostly because without showing us the horrible horrific horror that awaits a Scrooge who doesn't change his ways, Marley ups the stakes of the Christmas ghosts' visits. Basically, this first ghost is a dramatic tension device, meant to make us care about Scrooge's reform and also meant to explain why Scrooge would suddenly become concerned about and invested in his own rehabilitation. After all, who would want to be condemned to an eternity of being "doomed to wander through the world […] and witness what it cannot share, but might have shared on earth, and turned to happiness!"? (1.129). Certainly not us.
The first view we have of Jill Pole is not very favorable: She's crying behind the gym of her school, awaiting a beating from a group of bullies who rule the place. Jill feels sorry for herself and snaps at Eustace Scrubb, a classmate who understands what it means to be tortured by these louts. So why does Lewis open The Silver Chair by focusing on such an unpleasant child? For one thing, most of us can empathize with Jill. Who hasn't been stuck at a school they've hated, with people who are overbearing or downright dangerous? Jill's vulnerability and our sense of shared experience with her as readers make her a very attractive character indeed, especially for the school-age set. Jill is also wide open to possibility and imagination, something that the usual inmates of Experiment House seriously lack. When Eustace tentatively reaches out to share the cherished secret of his adventures in Narnia with her, she gives the best possible answer: "Pole, I say, are you good at believing things? I mean things that everyone here would laugh at?" "I've never had the chance," said Jill, "but I think I would be." (1.6-7) She gives truthful and humble-sounding response, which allows Eustace to share what he knows about Aslan and call out to him. In other words, it's Jill's willingness to believe that makes the adventure in Narnia possible.
A Texan aeronaut from a place called New Denmark in Lyra’s world. Lee Scoresby has a balloon and is friends with Iorek. Lee gives his life to save John Parry and help Lyra.
Jean Valjean Ex-convict still pursued by the law, who strives for moral perfection and achieves a kind of sainthood in his love for the little orphan Cosette. He is also known as M. Madeleine and M. Leblanc.
Jean Valjean Ex-convict still pursued by the law, who strives for moral perfection and achieves a kind of sainthood in his love for the little orphan Cosette. He is also known as M. Madeleine and M. Leblanc.
Jean Valjean Ex-convict still pursued by the law, who strives for moral perfection and achieves a kind of sainthood in his love for the little orphan Cosette. He is also known as M. Madeleine and M. Leblanc.
The first thing you need to know about Fezzik is that he's an absolutely huge dude, and the second is that he's really strong. But because he's so big and strong, people always assume he's dumb, which is something that strikes Fezzik as unfair. He says: "People are always thinking I'm so stupid because I'm big and strong and sometimes drool a little when I get excited." (5.51) Now to be fair, Fezzik isn't the smartest guy in the world, but he's as loyal as they come and a good (and useful) friend to men like Westley and Inigo. After all, where would those guys be without a giant around to smash through any door or soldier they come up against? And despite his beef with people dismissing his brain based on his body (something Buttercup also experiences—read up on her in this section for more on that), as the novel continues, we learn that Fezzik is really insecure in moments where he's called upon to do some actual thinking: When it came to power, nothing worried him. When it came to reading, he got knots in the middle of his stomach, and when it came to writing, he broke out in a cold sweat, and when addition was mentioned or, worse, long division, he always changed the subject right away. (5.158) His best response to these moments of stress is to create rhymes in his head. As the author tells us, "Anything you said out loud, he rhymed it inside. Sometimes the rhymes made sense, sometimes they didn't. Fezzik never cared much about sense; all that ever mattered was the sound" (5.644). Inigo Montoya drinks to handle his difficulties in life, Fezzik makes rhymes. To each their own, we suppose. So at the end of the day, Fezzik is basically a soft-but-deadly teddy bear. He's great if he's on your side, but downright scary if he ain't.
You know how, in the cowboy movies your grandpa just loves to watch, there's always a strong, silent type who comes in from somewhere like Montana and solves the problems of the whole town? Yeah. That's not Roy Eberhardt…at least at the beginning of Hoot. Roy's not exactly muscly. He's doesn't exactly keep his mouth shut. He does come from Montana, which makes all the kids at his school call him "cowgirl." Um, we're pretty sure the heroes in Westerns usually have names like Shane or Buck or Wild Bill. But there's no doubt about it: Roy's our hero. Without Roy, Mullet Fingers would still be playing pranks on the Mother Paula's construction site. Dana would still be whaling on the smaller kids in his class. Hey, even Roy's dad says that "nobody would've known what was happening" if Roy didn't bring it to their attention (Epilogue.19). So who is this (not-so) mysterious Montanan? Let's take a closer look.
Lyra’s friend and the rightful king of the armored bears. Iorek rescues Lyra from Bolvanger and fights Iofur Raknison for the right to rule the bears.
We could try to describe Artemis, but let's be honest—there's no one quite like him. He is, as we like to say when we're feeling fancy and lofty and literary, what you might call an enigma. So one of the best ways to tackle Artemis as a character, in fact, is actually to look at how he relates to a few of the other major players (which is usually not well).
The strongest of the refugees and a courageous and daring fighter. Bigwig's knowledge and power saves the group many times. Cunning and intelligent, Bigwig savors battle, but knows when to avoid it.
We're going to let you in on a little secret—Mariam is the real hero of A Thousand Splendid Suns. At first glance, you might be tempted to think of Laila as the novel's hero. She's the one who survives the events of the novel, and she's the one with great things in her future. Why wouldn't she be the hero? Well, you just need to take a closer look.
Addie Bundren The dying mother, who has ordered her coffin to be built under her window and who has extracted a promise from her family that they will take her to Jefferson to bury her.
Addie is Anse’s wife and mother to Cash, Darl, Jewel, Dewey Dell, and Vardaman (in that order). She narrates section 40, though she dies in Section 12.Before we start a character analysis here, we recommend going back and sloooowly reading Section 40 again. Most of the interesting stuff regarding Addie is revealed in those 10-ish pages.Back already? Great. Then, first off, you know that Addie hated Anse; that’s why she wants to be buried in Jefferson, with her own family, rather than with Anse’s (to which she feels no connection). You also know that Addie wasn’t exactly an ideal candidate for motherhood to begin with. She worked as a schoolteacher and enjoyed whipping her students, whom she secretly hated. Oddly enough, what appealed to Addie most about this corporal punishment was the fact that it made her a part of the students’ lives. "Now you are aware of me!" she used to think. But when she finally had her own children, what she resented most was that her "aloneness had been violated." What gives? Remember that this is the 1920s and Addie is a woman. She doesn’t really have much purpose to her life other than having babies. Her anger at her students probably has a lot to do with the hollowness she feels as a single woman. She wants to be noticed; she wants to be a real person. Having kids doesn’t solve the problem; it just presents a new one. Now she’s noticed, but defined by her motherhood. She will never be anything but a vessel for these babies. She hasn’t become her own person – she’s become part of a family. Now she resents that attachment, which is why she feels her "aloneness has been violated." This is, of course, the reason for Addie’s affair with Whitfield – to rebel against her role in the family. Or, as she calls it, "revenge" against Anse. The product, of course, was Jewel.Just what IS Addie’s special connection to this middle child? The way she explains it, Darl and Cash belonged to Anse. She never really wanted them, and having them in the first place was really just about her duty as a wife. But since Anse isn’t Jewel’s father, he has no ownership over him. Jewel is Addie’s and Addie’s alone. He’s also living proof, at least to her, that she was able to break out of her position as Anse’s wife and act as a real, independent person. It gets a little more confusing when Addie refers to Jewel as her "salvation," as he who will "save [her] from the water and from the fire […] though [she has] laid down [her] life" (39.5). As you’ve probably noticed by now, Jewel does indeed save Addie – the dead Addie in her coffin – from the water and from the fire. So, in one sense, Addie’s prophecy comes true. But Jewel saves her rotting corpse from the water and the fire; is this really tantamount to being her salvation? Wait a minute…this sounds like more…ironic inversion! (Are you tired of us talking about ironic inversion yet? If not, make sure you’ve read "Genre" for a full explanation.) The novel has unfolded in such a way so as to make a farce out of Addie’s prediction. Jewel didn’t save her or her soul; he just hauled a heavy, awkward, backwards coffin out of a river and out of a burning barn. What a mockery.Still, when you realize that Addie essentially predicted events after her own death, you might wonder for a moment if she isn’t the narrator of all the novel, because 1) she’s got weird prophetic abilities, 2) the title refers to an "I" which very well could be her, and 3) this would explain why Darl knew what was happening at her death: because she’s getting into everyone’s head from her all-seeing post-mortem vantage point in the sky. But this is unlikely. The point isn’t that Addie might be the narrator; the point is to question what it means to be a narrator, to have a point of view, to be limited by one’s perceptions. This segues right into one of Addie’s important realizations: words are absolutely useless. On a scale of 1 to 10, the communication skills of this cast rate about a -2. No one ever says what they’re really thinking, and everyone is always misinterpreting everyone else. The very concept of the narration itself – different narrators providing different perspectives – suggests that words are never accurate descriptions of reality anyway, because they are inherently subjective and interpretive.
The wife of Anse Bundren and mother to Cash, Darl, Jewel, Dewey Dell, and Vardaman. Addie is a mostly absent protagonist, and her death triggers the novel’s action. She is a former schoolteacher whose bitter, loveless life causes her to despise her husband and to invest all of her love in her favorite child, Jewel, rather than in the rest of her family or God.
John Galt The main character of the novel, John Galt is the man who dominates the action, though he doesn't appear until two-thirds of the way through the novel. John Galt is the character who conceives, initiates, and carries to a successful conclusion the strike of the great minds that forms the core of the novel's action. He is both the inventor of the motor and the "destroyer" that Dagny fears.
The man around whom the action of the novel revolves, Galt organizes and leads the strike of the mind. He is simultaneously the destroyer, the inventor of the revolutionary motor, Eddie’s mysterious friend, and Dagny’s greatest love. Brilliant and perceptive, he is the physical and intellectual representation of man’s ideal.
Sethe A former slave whose love for her children and hatred of slavery causes her to commit an unthinkable act in order to keep her children free from a life of bondage.
Sure, the whole book is named after Beloved. But hey, just because you have something named after you doesn't mean you're the (only) star. Is Grey's Anatomy only about Meredith Grey? Our point exactly. And after all, Sethe's the one who birthed, named, and killed Beloved. In other words, she lives by the time-honored parental credo: "I brought you into this world and I can take you out." Plus, the book does begin with her perspective. So what's Sethe's story, besides the whole baby-killer shtick?
Sethe, the protagonist of is a proud and independent woman who is extremely devoted to her children. Though she barely knew her own mother, Sethe’s motherly instincts are her most striking characteristic. Unwilling to relinquish her children to the physical, emotional, sexual, and spiritual trauma she endured as a slave at Sweet Home, she attempts to murder them in an act of motherly love and protection. She remains haunted by this and other scarring events in her past, which she tries, in vain, to repress.
A young woman raised by a strict and horrible aunt, Esther narrates her own half of the novel, chronicling how she becomes Ada's governess and the housekeeper of Bleak House, befriends and helps many people in the process, and eventually uncovers the mystery of her birth. Dickens almost has a patent out on Esther's character type. To put it briefly, she is perfect. No, scratch that – she is the perfect young woman, in all the ways that mattered to our stodgy, prim Victorian ancestors. There's almost a standard list of requirements we can run down to make sure: OK, then – we've got ourselves a very nice version of the "Angel in the House." That phrase comes from a sappy poem written in 1854 by Coventry Patmore about his wife Emily, summing up the awesome way she rolls, wife-style. The poem wasn't a big hit, but the phrase definitely stuck as a neat shorthand for what makes a "good" woman. She's got to stay in the house doing domestic things (so no pesky jobs, voting, or property ownership for you, ladies!). And she's got to be a ministering angel, constantly taking care of everyone around her (family, friends, random neighborhood poor people), without spending much time taking care of herself (no days off now! and stop looking at yourself in the mirror! well, unless it's just to make yourself attractive for your husband). You know, no big deal. In real, life of course, it was probably pretty hard to find anyone who actually fit this mold. But apparently every man could dream. And a man like Dickens could dream and write it down. Still, this Angel in the House is different in one important way from Dickens's other angels, like Amy in Little Dorrit, Biddy in Great Expectations, Sissy Jupe in Hard Times, or Lizzie Hexam in Our Mutual Friend. She actually gets to speak in her own voice and tell her own story. So what happens when a shy, modest, and self-abnegating character tries to be a narrator – someone who has to speak to others, talk about herself, and describe things with relative honesty? For one thing, because we are getting a lot of the narrating character's thoughts, Esther constantly has to analyze the people she sees, the events she experiences, and her own emotions. All this analysis leads to growth that can actually be demonstrated rather than described. So for instance, at first Esther has only very mild concern about Harold Skimpole, but as she gets older and more self-assured, she goes and actually tells him off. We, in turn, know that she has changed as a person because we see her going to give him what for rather than simply hearing about it from a third-person narrator. Another way to see growth is in the way Esther becomes more and more willing to be critical about what she sees. So while she describes Mrs. Jellyby in the nicest way possible and tries to find the good in that crazy woman with her philanthropic nonsense, later in the novel she is totally straight with us about Mr. Turveydrop and his selfish, ludicrous existence. She even gets kind of nasty in her (always internal) put-downs. See if you can spot a few toward the end of the novel. All that modesty and self-denial has a narrative drawback, which is easy to see whenever Esther has to describe the way other people think about her. Since she is so perfect, most people are totally bowled over by her, think of her extremely highly, and generally want to be super nice and complimentary to her. But a person who doesn't advertise her own awesomeness would never broadcast this kind of thing. So Dickens solves this problem by having Esther repeat the nice things other people say but then immediately downplay them herself. It's kind of an imperfect solution – every time she does this, she sounds like she's just fishing for compliments.
The narrator and protagonist. Esther, an orphan, becomes the housekeeper at Bleak House when she, Ada, and Richard are taken in by Mr. Jarndyce. Everyone loves Esther, who is selfless and nurturing, and she becomes the confidante of several young women. Although she eventually does find her mother, circumstances prevent them from developing a relationship. At first a hesitant, insecure narrator, Esther’s confidence in her storytelling grows, and she controls the narrative skillfully.
Inman is the leading man of this story. It's easy for readers to connect with his longing to go home from the suffering and fear of the Civil War…especially knowing he's had a bad wound. He's a talented fighter when he needs to be, but there's more to him than your standard hero type. Like Odysseus, he's clever and often uses brains to defeat superior numbers. He's somewhat on the quiet and introspective side, but he definitely tries to help people when he can. He's also intelligent and reflective in other ways, thinking about what life means, taking stories to heart, and seeking to understand the world in spite of all the ugliness he's seen at war. He'd probably be played by Jude Law in the movie—oh wait, he is.
The male protagonist. The novel follows Inman’s journey home from the slaughter he has witnessed in the Civil War. Inman is intelligent, literate, and sensitive, although he often appears emotionally reserved. Troubled by the carnage he has witnessed, Inman seeks spiritual solace in the natural world and in his memories of Ada. He attempts to retain his hope and his faith in a better world in the face of incomprehensible violence and cruelty.
It's hard to think about Coraline without comparing her to other famous young heroines like Lucy, Alice, Meg, or even Hermione. Coraline is a classic heroine in many ways – she's a little girl who's tougher than she seems – but that doesn't mean she isn't unique.
It's hard to think about Coraline without comparing her to other famous young heroines like Lucy, Alice, Meg, or even Hermione. Coraline is a classic heroine in many ways – she's a little girl who's tougher than she seems – but that doesn't mean she isn't unique.
Coraline's dad seems to be an okay dude. He tries his best to entertain his daughter (and to cook her dinner), but because he works from home, he doesn't have a lot of of time to play with her: He had his back to the door as he typed. "Go away," he said cheerfully, as she walked in. "I'm bored," she said. "Learn how to tap-dance," he suggested, without turning around. (2.47) Even if Coraline's dad is really busy, he loves her... a lot. Coraline tells the cat a story of when her dad stayed next to a wasps' nest, risking getting stung, in order to protect her. Would you take a wasp sting for someone? Only someone you really, really love, right? Coraline looks up to her dad, too. He's the one who taught her was bravery truly is: doing something when you're really scared. Without that lesson in bravery, she may have never been able to save him from the evil beldam, so it paid off.
Is she beautiful, or isn't she? This question starts off our first encounter with Gwendolen. It sets her up as a sort of walking contradiction – is she one thing, or is she its complete opposite? From that point, we're forced to look at Gwendolen from multiple perspectives. Sometimes we look down on her. Other times, we sympathize with her. Sometimes we think that Gwendolen is the worst, most selfish woman we've ever seen. Other times, we see that she's truly trying to be good. While we try to figure out all of the crazy contradictions in Gwendolen's character, it seems that one of the biggest questions that comes up about Gwendolen isn't about whether she's good or bad, but rather whether she's powerful or powerless. When we meet Gwendolen, we figure out pretty quickly that she's the kind of girl who likes to be in charge. She seems to be able to control the people around her without breaking a sweat. Her family fawns over her, even when she's treating them like the mud on her shoe. Men drop at her feet. She doesn't usually think twice about whether or not she's hurting other people. But then two different men enter Gwendolen's life, and both of them affect her deeply. On one hand, there's Grandcourt, whom Gwendolen eventually marries. Gwendolen doesn't want to have to go to work when she finds out that her family has lost everything. She figures that, by marrying Grandcourt, she'll gain financial freedom, influence in society, and absolute control over one man. Things don't go as planned, and instead Grandcourt assumes total control over Gwendolen. Oops. Gwendolen's relationship with Daniel is also pretty interesting. He doesn't intentionally control her in any way, but in some ways he makes her feel sort of powerless. Daniel makes Gwendolen reflect on her actions, something that she's definitely not used to doing. She worries that he disapproves of her actions, from gambling in the casino to marrying Grandcourt. Gwendolen finds someone to look up to in Daniel. At the end of the novel, we see a totally different Gwendolen than the one we met on the first page. She's no longer as in control of herself as she once was, but she understands herself more – which makes you wonder whether she was really all that in control of herself in the first place, or if she just thought she did.
It's OK if you hate Grandcourt. We don't like him at all, either – that just goes to show how well George Eliot created this villain. Everything about him is mean, and he just oozes with sleaze. Grandcourt seems fine enough when we first meet him, but pretty soon it becomes clear that he is a selfish jerk who doesn't care about anyone but himself and his own gain. He just swoops into town one day to check out Diplow, since he's pretty confident that he'll inherit the house from Sir Hugo. He doesn't think for a second about how he might displace Lady Mallinger and her daughters. It seems almost permissible that he does that, though, because that's how society worked in those days – it wasn't really anything personal. Men inherited the property, and women relied on their kindness. Fine. But let's think about how little regard Grandcourt has for the people who are actually close to him. Lush, for example, has worked for Grandcourt for the last fifteen years – you'd think that Grandcourt would give a hoot about him by now, but no. The narrator repeatedly compares Lush to a puppy that has been kicked. Come to think of it, Grandcourt totally seems like the kind of guy who would kick a puppy. But we digress. Aside from Lush, think of Lydia Glasher. She's the mother of his four children, and we learn that when he first got with her, Grandcourt was more in love than he ever thought he could be. Just as easily, though, Grandcourt falls out of love with her. She's ruined; Grandcourt destroyed her marriage, and now she can never re-enter society and live the same way she did before. Of course, it's through Grandcourt's relationship with Gwendolen that we learn the most about the guy. He plays games with her from start to finish. He knows that Lush arranged for Lydia to tell Gwendolen everything about their relationship. Still, Grandcourt keeps his lips zipped and sits back and watches Gwendolen squirm with self-reproach and unhappiness. He loves wielding power over her. She has to do exactly what he likes, and she has no control in their relationship. No wonder she isn't all that sad about his death itself – she worries more about the fact that she's a murderer. She couldn't care less if she never sees him again. You know what? We'd probably feel the same way.
Clara Copperfield David's mother. She is an attractive, tender person, but impractical and emotional and easily taken in by Mr. Murdstone, who marries her because he is interested in her annuity.
We never actually meet Mr. Copperfield in the flesh (since he dies before David is even born), but we do get some hints as to his character. It turns out that Mr. Copperfield had a falling out with his aunt, Miss Betsey Trotwood, because she did not approve of his marriage to the doll-like, childish Mrs. Copperfield. And indeed, it seems that Miss Betsey is right – Mrs. Copperfield is not capable of managing a family, much to her son's misfortune. But this kind of poor judgment seems to have been a regular part of Mr. Copperfield's character. As a small illustration, in the first chapter, we find out that Mr. Copperfield bought their house thinking that there would be rooks there. (Rooks are big, black birds – kind of like crows – native to England.) He was so sure that there would be rooks at this house that he calls it the Rookery. But they have never seen so much as a rook feather near their house. When Miss Betsey hears the story of the rooks, she exclaims that it is "David Copperfield [Sr.] all over!" (1.35) to buy a house expecting birds on faith, without ever checking. The point of this story is that Mr. Copperfield must have been a trusting, good-hearted individual, but he made bad choices because he was not practical. We can't help but notice that his trusting, foolish nature foreshadows some of his son's troubles with his first wife, Dora Spenlow.
We think Miss Betsey Trotwood says it best when she describes Mrs. Copperfield as "a very Baby" (1.18). Miss Betsey is commenting on Mrs. Copperfield's appearance – her big blue eyes, her flossy golden hair, her childlike face – but she's also babyishly irresponsible. Indeed, before marrying Mr. Copperfield, Mrs. Copperfield works as a nursery-governess – a nanny. So, even when she is working to support herself, Mrs. Copperfield is strongly identified with babies and children. Her behavior in the novel reflects this association of ideas. Indeed, Mrs. Copperfield dies as she lives: Peggotty comments that she passes away "like a child that had gone to sleep" (9.103).Mrs. Copperfield is barely twenty when she gets married; her husband is a man twice her age and in poor health. Widowed before her son is even born, Mrs. Copperfield is left to raise David with the help of her housekeeper, Peggotty. When Peggotty tries to warn Mrs. Copperfield that Mr. Murdstone, her new boyfriend, is not a good man, Mrs. Copperfield throws a huge tantrum: "Was ever any poor girl so ill-used by her servants as I am!" (2.49), she exclaims. But she soon makes up with Peggotty and it's as though the whole fight never happened. This cycle happens over and over again – Mrs. Copperfield is quick to get angry and quick to forget about it. But she never takes advice and she refuses to do anything against her own wishes.So, we get the sense that Mrs. Copperfield is flighty, easily distracted, and spoiled. She means no harm, but she also doesn't have the strength of character to resist a clever, brutal fellow like Mr. Murdstone. Mr. Murdstone flatters Mrs. Copperfield: when David repeats to his mother that Mr. Murdstone called her "bewitching" (2.91) and a "pretty little widow" (2.93), Mrs. Copperfield blushes, laughs, and is generally very pleased. It's these compliments that bring Mrs. Copperfield to accept Mr. Murdstone's proposal of marriage even though her most trusted advisor, Peggotty, can see something is wrong with the man.Once Mrs. Copperfield is finally married to Mr. Murdstone, the danger of her childish manners really becomes clear. Once they are married, she is totally trapped: there is no way for her to get away from the cruel authority of Mr. Murdstone. Mr. Murdstone immediately starts scolding her, playing a father figure to his new, young wife. When David comes home from his first visit to Yarmouth, he finds Mr. Murdstone married to his mother and starts to cry. Mrs. Copperfield starts her usual fussing: "Davy, you naughty boy! Peggotty, you savage creature! [...] What a troublesome world this is" (4.10). In response to her tantrum, Mr. Murdstone replies, "Firmness, my dear!" (4.12). This response – "Firmness!" – becomes the motto of Mr. Murdstone's. Whenever Mrs. Copperfield starts to cry, Mr. Murdstone mocks her for it and shuts her down. And whenever Mrs. Copperfield shows any kind of affection to Peggotty or to her own son, Mr. Murdstone mocks her for it and shuts her down. Eventually, he bullies Mrs. Copperfield into believing that David is a bad boy and must be sent away to school. Mrs. Copperfield comments to Peggotty that she is "a weak, light, girlish creature, and that [Mr. Murdstone] is a firm, grave, serious man" (8.92). Thus, Mr. Murdstone must know better than Mrs. Copperfield does, even though David is plainly miserable.But all of Mr. Murdstone's firmness, graveness, and seriousness finally wear Mrs. Copperfield out. She bears Mr. Murdstone a son, a baby that never gets a name in the novel, and the two of them waste away together. Mr. Murdstone's brutality eventually destroys Mrs. Copperfield. And while David loves and pities his mother, it's clear that he resents her for the weakness that allowed Mr. Murdstone into their lives in the first place. David describes her "pettish willful" (4.10) manner, meaning that Mrs. Copperfield is cranky, irritable, and stubborn. Mrs. Copperfield is a pretty young woman, but she also has the kind of moral weakness that makes her a poor choice for head of any household. Mrs. Copperfield also foreshadows David's own marriage to Dora Spenlow, who is equally childlike, foolish, and unprepared for family life. For some interesting contrasts to these women characters, check out our thoughts on Agnes Wickfield and Miss Betsey Trotwood; also see our "Theme" discussion on gender.
James Steerforth A spoiled young man whom David admires. He has a surface polish and the good manners that deceive people who do not know him. His true selfishness is shown when he deserts Em'ly, leaving her with his servant, Littimer. He is killed in a storm off Yarmouth along with Ham, who tries to save him.
Steerforth is one of those effortlessly graceful people who turn everything they touch into gold. You know, every school has at least one: the popular kid who seems easily to get whatever he wants. And that's kind of the problem: Steerforth is an energetic guy with nothing to push against or to do with his talents. He's got money and a good family, so he doesn't have to struggle the way David or Tommy Traddles do. Steerforth is also absolutely not used to opposition, which gives him a sense of entitlement. This leads not only to his own death, but also to the social ruin of Emily and the death of Ham Peggotty. Still, while Steerforth may be bad news, he's also probably one of the most complex and nuanced bad guys in this novel. Steerforth isn't cartoonishly evil the way Uriah Heep, Mr. Murdstone, and Mr. Creakle are evil. But he does terrible wrong in any case. So, we're intrigued!David meets Steerforth at Salem House. Steerforth is the most popular boy in school, so popular that even sadistic Mr. Creakle doesn't dare to beat him. (One might wonder why, if Steerforth has so much influence with Mr. Creakle, he doesn't prevent Mr. Creakle from viciously beating the other boys. But that doesn't occur to David at the time.) Anyway, David is immediately drawn to Steerforth's handsomeness, charm, and charisma. This isn't to say that there are no warning signs that Steerforth's moral compass is a bit wonky. David tells us all about Steerforth's contempt when dealing with poor Mr. Mell (further discussed in Mr. Mell's own "Character Analysis"). And then there's the matter of Miss Rosa Dartle's scar. When David and Steerforth reunite by chance at an inn in London when David is 17, Steerforth invites him to stay with Steerforth's mother for a couple of days before they both head over to Yarmouth to visit the Peggottys. Steerforth's mother has a companion, an orphaned cousin of Steerforth's late father: Miss Rosa Dartle. Miss Dartle has a deep scar on her lip. She got this scar when Steerforth was a child. She said something that irritated Steerforth, so he threw a hammer at her face. This is not the act of a generous or good-natured kid. But probably worst of all is Steerforth's unapologetic lack of sympathy for the poor. On David's first night staying at the Steerforth home in Highgate, Steerforth comments:[The poor] are not expected to be as sensitive as we are. Their delicacy is not to be shocked, or hurt very easily. They are wonderfully virtuous, I dare say. [...] But they have not very fine natures; and they may be thankful that, like their coarse rough skins, they are not easily wounded. (20.39)He's talking about poor people as though they are animals, with "coarse rough skins." And that condescending bit about them being "wonderfully virtuous" makes his belief that they cannot be "hurt very easily" even more like a slap in the face. Steerforth's belief that the poor are basically insensitive foreshadows his own mother's truly nasty treatment of Mr. Peggotty when Emily runs away. Anyway, David willfully refuses to acknowledge that Steerforth means what he says, but Steerforth's later behavior towards to Peggottys proves that he really thinks poor people don't have the same feelings as rich people.
A condescending, self-centered villain. From his boyhood, Steerforth possesses a restless energy that he can neither satisfy nor divert. He charms both women and men for the feeling of power it gives him. He also abuses David, although David is too enraptured with him and too grateful for his patronage to notice.
Mrs. Steerforth is like a walking, talking explanation for why Steerforth is such a bad person. Not that she's been abusive to him, oh no – just the opposite. She has channeled her entire emotional life into her son. So that Steerforth can continue to be comfortable in his own superiority, she deliberately sends Steerforth to a school she knows isn't going to challenge him (Salem House). Steerforth's mother sends him to Oxford University without apparently demanding that he do any work there – as long as Steerforth keeps visiting her regularly, she gives him plenty of money and space to do whatever the hell he wants. Even Steerforth recognizes that the total lack of guidance and discipline he has received from his mother has had a bad effect on his character. But Mrs. Steerforth just keeps spoiling and indulging him.This all comes back to bite her when David and Mr. Peggotty come to visit Mrs. Steerforth in her home at Highgate (near London). They arrive to bring her the news that Steerforth has carried away Emily. Mr. Peggotty asks if there is any chance that Steerforth will marry Emily. Mrs. Steerforth absolutely refuses: it would be bad for Steerforth's social position to marry a fisherman's daughter. Mr. Peggotty points out that he loves his niece just as much as Mrs. Steerforth loves her son, and would do anything to help Emily. Mrs. Steerforth replies with one of the creepiest things in this book: she says that Mr. Peggotty doesn't and can't love Emily like Mrs. Steerforth loves her son.Mrs. Steerforth's love for James Steerforth is based on her belief that he's like an extension of her. She has provided everything he could want so long as he keeps all of his emotional energies focused on her. When Steerforth takes up with Emily, Mrs. Steerforth interprets this as a rejection by her son. She thinks that Steerforth has replaced Mrs. Steerforth with Emily (*creepy*). So, unless Steerforth gets rid of Emily, "comes humbly to [Mrs. Steerforth] and begs for [her] forgiveness" (22.119), she will never see her son again. As for Mr. Peggotty, Mrs. Steerforth shows no sympathy for his loss at all. She is totally consumed by her own feelings. And that's the main difference between the two: Mrs. Steerforth's love is utterly selfish, while Mr. Peggotty's is completely self-sacrificing. David recognizes the same stubborn streak he has seen in Steerforth, when Mrs. Steerforth rejects her son, Mr. Peggotty, and basically the whole world, All of those glimpses David has caught of Steerforth's arrogance and unwillingness to admit he's wrong come directly from Steerforth's mother:All that I had ever seen in him of an unyielding, willful spirit, I saw in her. All the understanding that I had now of his misdirected energy, became an understanding of her character too, and a perception that it was, in its strongest springs, the same. (22.120)Mrs. Steerforth's character is "unyielding," and she trains her son to be equally so. Steerforth has both bad genes and a bad upbringing; perhaps if he had had a better, more careful parent, he would have survived and become a great man. But Mrs. Steerforth gets punished by the novel for her poor training of Steerforth. When Mrs. Steerforth hears about Steerforth's sudden death, she crumples and falls as though dead. Mrs. Steerforth doesn't die, though – she lives on to old age in a state of senility, constantly yelled at and scolded by her reluctant companion, Miss Dartle. All of Mrs. Steerforth's energies were focused on her son, and once he has gone, Mrs. Steerforth has nothing left to do but live an empty, thwarted life.
The cool thing about David is that, even though he's not the narrator of the novel per se, we still get to read his thoughts the whole time. David's our protagonist, and sure he makes us groan, but we just spend so much time in his head, watching him watch himself in decline, that we can't help but sort of feel for the guy. When we first meet David, things are kind of humdrum, but they're pretty much as good as they're going to get. He feels OK in general, but by that we mean he regards his life the way you regard the ham and cheese sandwich on white bread that your mom backed for your lunch today: it's fine, but it's not inspiring or exciting, and you would gladly trade it for something more flavorful. His job has him in a funk, his sex life is sort of lukewarm (and he pays for "eh" sex at that…), he's not getting any younger, and he's not feeling too inspired professionally or personally.Cue Melanie. When Melanie enters the picture, things seem to perk up. We even see David feeling young again; he's been out of the game for a long time, and he's not sure as to what's the best way to make the girl swoon. Of course, we see the end coming before David does. While he's lost in post-coital bliss, we see her frowning, looking away, and making excuses not to see him. Sure, we're confused when she comes over to his place unannounced, too, but it seems like David lets his passion get the best of him to the extent that he doesn't see things falling apart until it's too late. We haven't been on the dating market nearly as long as he has, but we could definitely offer him a few pointers, especially when we see his mind in a frenzy trying to figure out how to get Melanie's attention – even while he's lecturing an entire class!While Melanie brings out the young and vulnerable side of David (including some adolescent insecurities), his colleagues bring out his cocky side. Why does he have to act so smug during his hearing, we want to ask? Why doesn't he suck it up and just say he's sorry? David's caught in a bind here – he doesn't want to admit to something he doesn't actually feel, which is understandable in a way; admitting you did something wrong can make you feel undignified. But unluckily for David, refusing to admit he's wrong slaps him with a different kind of disgrace altogether: he basically loses everything he's worked for. We're not advocating lying, but do you think that insisting to tell the truth was worth it?So then we go from David in the city to David in the country. Some of the same things plague him as before: he worries about getting older and he continues to daydream about Melanie and her tight little body. But other things start to creep into his mind: what in the world is he doing out in the country? Who are these people? Why are they so poorly dressed? Why do they set their sights so low?These problems, of course, are soon overshadowed by much bigger issues after he and Lucy are attacked. How can he talk to her about her rape? How can he look at himself the same way knowing he may have put Melanie through what Lucy went through? Was he a good enough father to Lucy, or will he enter old age having let her down? By the end of the novel, David puts himself into a real gloom (we're guessing spending all that time helping to put dogs to sleep isn't doing him a whole lot of good emotionally, either – though it does give him a sense of purpose). In the end, David's a guy who tries his best, but he also makes a lot of mistakes along the way. He's stubborn, he's strong-headed, and he sees his importance waning. Like we said, as much as we dislike him sometimes, we've got to feel for him.
When we first meet Lucy, it's sort of a shock that she's even remotely related to David. In contrast with David's sleek, suave, sophisticated ways – pouring red wine, watching art films, teaching at a university in a major metropolitan area – Lucy is an earthy woman who lives out in the country, works the land for a living, and doesn't pay attention to fashion or body image. We learn that Lucy's home was once a commune, but now she's the only person who hasn't moved away:[…] now here she is, flowered dress, bare feet and all, in a house full of the smell of baking, no longer a child playing at farming but a solid countrywoman, a boervrou. (7.5)We don't know about you, but this both strikes us as a little odd and makes us more interested in Lucy – why should she decide to stay on the farm even when her friends (and lover) leave? Lucy never gives us these answers up front, but she keeps our curiosity churning every step of the way through the book.Lucy's relationships with others, particularly her sexual relationships, are some key components of her character that are worth paying attention to. Slowly through the course of the novel, we learn that Lucy is a lesbian and that she used to live with a woman named Helen, who has since moved on. Lucy's sexual identity doesn't just tell us about Lucy's views on sex; it also provides a platform upon which David thinks about women and sexuality in general. In some ways, David feels more at ease talking to Lucy about his affair with Melanie because both he and she have experience with women, romantically and sexually. Of course, we learn pretty early on in the novel that Lucy isn't just going to see things from David's side of the coin; her experience as a victim of sexual assault inevitably prods her to see things from Melanie's perspective – or, you might argue, a more universal female perspective – as well.Lucy's experience as a victim of assault doesn't just change her views on male/female dynamics; it also changes the way she relates to the people in her own life. It seems like David and Lucy are on the verge of developing a closer father/daughter relationship when the unthinkable happens: three intruders viciously attack Lucy and David, and during this attack Lucy is raped. Lucy's character undergoes a perceptible shift after this event. Despite the obvious trauma she experiences, she is reluctant to seek help from the police. This totally baffles David. She becomes depressed and withdrawn, lying awake all night and falling asleep during the day. She also becomes increasingly irritable and snippy with David. While it doesn't seem that they are ever really that close, before her rape Lucy is at least willing to open up to David about a number of highly personal topics. It seems that, after her rape, though, she closes up. More than that, she almost seems to see David as no better than the men who raped her – didn't he, after all, put another woman through something just like what she's dealing with?After a good deal of tension and conflict emerges between Lucy and David, Lucy seems to think that David is incapable of offering her a better option than what she already has. In fact, in spite of David's best efforts to persuade her that the country is dangerous and uninhabitable, it's hard to convince her that she should go back to live in a more "civilized" setting with David. Instead, her rape seems to tie her even more to the land and the people there. Just think about how Lucy's relationship with Petrus changes after Lucy is assaulted. They go from being friendly neighbors to becoming something like family. The way that Lucy looks out for Petrus and defers to his needs is especially apparent when the boy shows up at Petrus's party: even though Lucy is totally upset to see him there, she also doesn't want to disturb Petrus's big event or mess things up for him by getting the police involved, so she opts for a quiet exit (even though David clearly isn't capable of following suit). When we find out that Lucy is pregnant as a result of her rape, she decides to marry Petrus as a means of protection. We can tell that there isn't much in the way of a personal connection between Petrus and Lucy, but they do coexist in their own unique way. Lucy helps Petrus achieve a higher social status by helping him to acquire land; Petrus supposedly looks after her (though he's notably M.I.A. during her rape) and will look after her child when he or she is born.By the end of the novel, it seems that she's tied to the country for good. What do you think Lucy's actions say about her? We don't have access to her thoughts, so we only have her actions to go on for clues. Why do you think she decides to stay in the country, and what do you think she wants in the long run?
Much like the heroine of a Jane Austen novel, Beatrice Prior ends up learning a lot about herself and her world over the course of the novel. Plus she learns how to fire a gun and beat people up. Jane Austen would be proud. And that's one big reason why we like Beatrice as a protagonist and narrator: she may be wrong at times (or lots of times), but she always learns. She changes and grows. Our other big reason for liking Beatrice? She's a lot like us, with all her conflicting feelings. Aren't we all a little Divergent? Group hug time, Shmoopers.
The intelligent, courageous sixteen-year-old protagonist. Unable to conform to the humble ideals of Abnegation, her home faction, she joins Dauntless, where she struggles to be both brave and unselfish.
Don Juan The son of an easygoing father and a strict mother who is doted on by his parents. At the age of sixteen he has an affair with Donna Julia.
The novel’s tragicomic hero. Don Quixote’s main quest in life is to revive knight-errantry in a world devoid of chivalric virtues and values. He believes only what he chooses to believe and sees the world very differently from most people. Honest, dignified, proud, and idealistic, he wants to save the world. As intelligent as he is mad, Don Quixote starts out as an absurd and isolated figure and ends up as a pitiable and lovable old man whose strength and wisdom have failed him.
The novel’s tragicomic hero. Don Quixote’s main quest in life is to revive knight-errantry in a world devoid of chivalric virtues and values. He believes only what he chooses to believe and sees the world very differently from most people. Honest, dignified, proud, and idealistic, he wants to save the world. As intelligent as he is mad, Don Quixote starts out as an absurd and isolated figure and ends up as a pitiable and lovable old man whose strength and wisdom have failed him.
Quincey Morris is the character that we know least about... besides the fact that he's as 'Murican as apple pie. He's first introduced to us when Lucy describes his proposal to her in a letter to Mina. Lucy says that he "is really well educated and has exquisite manners" (5.7), even though he can be super funny. He only uses American slang when no uptight English people are around to be shocked and horrified by his language. (The modern American reader will think Quincey's "American slang" is hilarious.) When Lucy rejects his proposal, he tells her that her "honesty and pluck have made [him] a friend, and that's rarer than a lover; it's more unselfish anyhow" (5.13).Most of what we know about Quincey, besides his use of "American slang," is that he values "honesty and pluck" above almost anything. He's straightforward and never says anything he doesn't mean. He takes what people say to him at face value and accepts even the strangest things (like the existence of vampires) with remarkable calm.In addition, Quincey is always the first person to volunteer when something needs to be shot or killed. During a meeting with the Crew of Light, he excuses himself from the table to go take a pot shot at a bat he sees from the window (18.44). Of course, we're supposed to assume it was Dracula, in the form of a bat, eavesdropping on them. None of the other characters would have taken that kind of initiative.If you want to learn more about Quincey's death and the part he plays in destroying Dracula, check out "What's Up with the Ending?"
The first mayor of Terminus, Salvor Hardin saw the Foundation through its first two Seldon Crises. He's also the first protagonist Asimov wrote for the Foundation series, since he came up with "The Encyclopedists" and "The Mayors" well before "The Psychohistorians." So while Seldon might set the character precedent, it was Salvor Hardin who solidified it with fully drawn-in details and two stories worthy of development. Let's jump in and see what we can find.
If you ask us, it's no coincidence that people get Mr. Frankenstein and his monster mixed up. He may have conquered the secrets of nature, but he's a big dunce when it comes to, oh, everything else. So, how did this kid messing around with the nineteenth-century equivalent of a chemistry set end up on a suicide mission over frozen Artic wastes?
The doomed protagonist and narrator of the main portion of the story. Studying in Ingolstadt, Victor discovers the secret of life and creates an intelligent but grotesque monster, from whom he recoils in horror. Victor keeps his creation of the monster a secret, feeling increasingly guilty and ashamed as he realizes how helpless he is to prevent the monster from ruining his life and the lives of others.
William is Frankenstein's younger brother, and, well, he's not the brightest crayon in the box. Nor is he the most considerate, the kindest, or the most interesting. He insists that the monster wants to "eat [him] and tear [him] to pieces," and then, hilariously, threatens to tell his dad about him (16.27). In fact, he's pretty much the embodiment of all the shallow negativity of the other characters in the story. Fitting, then, that he's extremely attractive: He is very tall of his age, with sweet laughing blue eyes, dark eyelashes, and curling hair. When he smiles, two little dimples appear on each cheek, which are rosy with health. He has already had one or two little WIVES, but Louisa Biron is his favourite, a pretty little girl of five years of age. (6.8) Hmm. It seems that, just like Frankenstein, William already makes his value judgments based on looks. Only—in the case of the monster, he's actually right to do so. Does William's unfortunate experience prove that prejudice against ugliness is innate? Or does it just prove that even a six year old can be hopelessly prejudiced?
Victor’s youngest brother and the darling of the Frankenstein family. The monster strangles William in the woods outside Geneva in order to hurt Victor for abandoning him. William’s death deeply saddens Victor and burdens him with tremendous guilt about having created the monster.
Grendel's mother doesn't have all that much going for her. She's not good looking, she's not a sparkling conversationalist, and she's not a very good cook. She... okay, we'll be real: she smells of fish, she has nasty amounts of body hair, and she has a tendency to suffocate her son when she gives him hugs. But like all the other characters in this novel, Mama Grendel is an intricate study in psychology. Here again, Gardner plays with types and categories: this lady is a mother (and does all things a mother would do), but she's also a monster. Unlike Grendel, she is stereotypically monstrous—she doesn't seem to have language or higher thought patterns. She seems to belong squarely in the animal world. And yet...
The protagonist and narrator of the novel. A great, bearlike monster, Grendel is the first of three monsters defeated by the Geatish hero Beowulf in the sixth-century poem In he is a lonely creature who seeks an understanding of the seemingly meaningless world around him. As an outsider, Grendel observes and provides commentary on the human civilization he battles.
A foul, wretched being, and Grendel’s only apparent family member. Grendel’s mother lives with Grendel in a cave in a vast underground realm. She desperately tries to protect Grendel from the humans and his fate. She has either forgotten or never knew how to speak, though at times her gibberish approaches coherent language.
Lyra’s father. Lord Asriel had an affair with Mrs. Coulter, Lyra’s mother, and killed Mr. Coulter. Lord Asriel masquerades as Lyra’s uncle early on in the trilogy. Lord Asriel kills Roger Parslow and leads the army of rebels against God. His daemon is Stelmaria, a snow leopard.
Madame Zeroni is the great-great-great-grandmother of Hector Zeroni, Stanley's friend at Camp Green Lake. She gave Stanley's great-great-grandfather a pig but when he broke his promise of carrying her to the top of a mountain she might have put a curse on his family.
The novel's protagonist, Stanley is an overweight kid with a lot of bad luck. He is convicted of a crime he did not commit and is sent to the Camp Green Lake juvenile detention center. Non-violent and generally kind, Stanley has a difficult time in school and at the camp. Through his experience at the hellish Camp Green Lake he becomes physically stronger and more self-confident. He befriends Zero, another boy at the camp and through this friendship he succeeds in eradicating his family curse.
The first Stanley Yelnats is the son of Elya Yelnats and the great-grandfather of the protagonist Stanley. Kate Barlow robbed the first Stanley Yelnats of his fortune while he was moving from New York to California. He survived by climbing to the top of a thumb shaped mountain (which he called God's thumb) which happened to be Sam's old onion field.
We admit it. We've had some less-than-stellar nicknames. Our grandma called us Mousiekins. Our dad called up Scooter. Our older brother called us Ohmygodgetoutofmyroomyoubrat. But none of those is as weird as Mullet Fingers. Until, of course, you realize that catching mullets (the shiny fish, not the ridiculous hairstyle) is an awesome thing to do, and the name Mullet Fingers is actually high praise. But that kind of weird-to-awesome switcheroo is what Mullet Fingers has on lockdown. When you meet him, he's a shoeless weirdo…but after you get to know him, you realize he's a kick-butt outlaw who has the makings of an awesome environmental activist, EPA agent, or snake-charmer.
Brian de Bois-Guilbert is actually kind of unusual as a villain in a popular novel. We said in "In a Nutshell" that Sir Walter Scott was the J.K. Rowling of his day, responsible for the bestselling books of the early 19th century. That would make Bois-Guilbert his Voldemort, which doesn't seem quite right. Bois-Guilbert is the main villain of Ivanhoe, he has a complicated backstory with our hero, and he certainly thirsts after power. But where Scott could have gone big with his central villain, giving him essentially no redeeming characteristics or sympathetic qualities (and a snake face to prove his inhumanity), Scott chooses instead to make Bois-Guilbert a surprisingly complex character. Don't get us wrong: Bois-Guilbert has some crazy, Voldemort-worthy plans. When he's trying to persuade Rebecca to run away with him, he tells her that they could take over the whole of Europe and the Middle East with the army of the Knights Templar at their backs. That's a power-hungry fantasy equal to those of any insane dark wizard. The main difference between Bois-Guilbert and a lot of standard bad guys (and super different from Voldemort) is that he has the capacity to love. He is proud, arrogant, and violent, but he loves Rebecca enough to offer to give up his place with the Knights Templar and join up with their enemies, the forces of Saladin's armies. He's willing to resign everything he has fought for and to start again in a less prejudiced place if Rebecca will go with him. That's a sign that he has genuine and deep feelings for her. On the other hand, Bois-Guilbert frequently insults Rebecca's people, the Jews. He also physically carries her off from Torquilstone, despite her strong resistance. He doesn't rape her, but he makes it very difficult for her to say no. Only Rebecca's remarkable stubbornness and religious faith keep her from getting worn down by Bois-Guilbert's demands. His refusal to listen to Rebecca is what gets her into the whole witchcraft trial in the first place: because Bois-Guilbert brings her to Templestowe, she falls under the power of Lucas Beaumanoir. So he may "love" Rebecca (according to his own definition), but he doesn't treat her as though he truly feels for her.
Bertha Antoinetta Mason Rochester Rochester's wife, the crazy woman in the attic. A Creole woman from Spanish Town, Jamaica, Bertha was betrothed to Rochester by the arrangement of their fathers, who planned to consolidate their wealth. This beautiful and majestic woman disintegrates into debauchery, coarseness, and, eventually, madness soon after their wedding. Bertha's mother was also mad and the novel suggests that Bertha's problems are a maternal inheritance. Following the deaths of his brother and father, Rochester returns to England with Bertha, locking her up in the third story of Thornfield, with Grace Poole as her keeper. She occasionally escapes her imprisonment, perpetrating violence whenever she gets loose. Eventually, she sets fire to Thornfield. Bertha is another example of unsavory foreignness in the novel.
Edward Fairfax Rochester Jane's lover; a dark, passionate, brooding man. A traditional romantic hero, Rochester has lived a troubled wife. Married to an insane Creole woman, Bertha Mason, Rochester sought solace for several years in the arms of mistresses. Finally, he seeks to purify his life and wants Jane Eyre, the innocent governess he has hired to teach his foster daughter, Adèle Varens, to become his wife. The wedding falls through when she learns of the existence of his wife. As penance for his transgressions, he is punished by the loss of an eye and a hand when Bertha sets fire to Thornfield. He finally gains happiness at the novel's end when he is reunited with Jane.
Mr. Rochester is stern-featured, heavy-browed, craggy-faced, rude, abrupt, horny, twice Jane’s age, always on the edge of violence, likes to order people around, keeps his wife locked in the attic, and teases Jane on at least one occasion until she cries. Here’s the crazy part: that’s why he’s so awesome. He may be fantastically ugly. He may be kind of a jerk. But he’s real! Well, okay, he’s not real. He’s a character in Jane Eyre. But you know what we’re talking about; he’s a genuine-seeming character, not some stuck-up, pompous, handsome young man who smoothly says all the proper things and doesn’t have any personality of his own. This novel isn’t about proper behavior; it’s about passion.
Jane’s employer and the master of Thornfield, Rochester is a wealthy, passionate man with a dark secret that provides much of the novel’s suspense. Rochester is unconventional, ready to set aside polite manners, propriety, and consideration of social class in order to interact with Jane frankly and directly. He is rash and impetuous and has spent much of his adult life roaming about Europe in an attempt to avoid the consequences of his youthful indiscretions. His problems are partly the result of his own recklessness, but he is a sympathetic figure because he has suffered for so long as a result of his early marriage to Bertha.
Obvs, Johnny is the most important character in the novel. And while the book is named after him, Johnny does a pretty good job of summing up his all-star status by himself: "The two youngest Laphams were always insulting him, not only about how smart he was, but how smart he thought he was. He didn't care" (1.1.47). Haters gonna hate, right?
There are a lot of adventure heroes we can think of right off the tops of our heads: Harry Potter. Katniss Everdeen. Bilbo Baggins. Luke Skywalker. And you know what they all have in common? They are all leading pretty average lives when adventure suddenly comes to find them. Oh sure, Harry Potter sometimes makes strange things happen around him, and he is certainly not living in a normal household, what with the monstrous, abusive Dursleys. But it isn't until Hagrid comes storming into his life with his giant good nature and his suspiciously wand-like umbrella that Harry's adventures in the wizarding world really take off. There's also Katniss Everdeen of District Twelve. Obviously, with the Reaping Days and the unfair social organization of the Districts, things are out of whack in Panem long before Katniss joins the seventy-fourth Hunger Games. And yet, it takes Katniss's Reaping, when she finally leaves District Twelve to become a national symbol of resistance to the Capital, to change everything in her life. In both of these cases—and in most adventure novels—there is a rich set-up for excitement, but the plots only really get going when the main characters leave their familiar environments and start on the next parts of their lives. Kim is a bit of an exception to this rule. Like Harry Potter, Kimball O'Hara (named after his father; Kim for short) is an orphan. But unlike Harry—or Bilbo, or Katniss, or Luke, for that matter—Kim starts out his story as an adventurer. At the start of the book, he's sitting on a cannon outside the Lahore Museum having the time of his life—how much more exciting can you get? From the first chapter of Kim, we know that Kim is a rascal who lives by his wits, charming people and cheating them all around the city of Lahore. In an opposite movement from, say, Luke's introduction to the Rebel Alliance and the Force in Star Wars or Bilbo's sudden quest for dwarvish gold and dragon-slaying in The Hobbit, the "adventure" of Kim's life is to get him to go to school (sadly, not a wizarding school) and calm down. He already starts out so free and easy that Kim's main quest over the course of the novel is to learn enough responsibility and discipline to become a British Indian Secret Service agent. In a way, Kim's quest reminds us a lot more of our own growth into adulthood than, say, Katniss Everdeen's thrilling but highly lethal Hunger Games. While very few of us have had to use our archery skills to defend our lives in highly public fights to the death, a lot of us have had to go to school to gain the skills necessary to perform our chosen jobs. Even though Kim's character is unusual, his life in British India is exciting, and his future job is as Ultra Cool Super Spy, honestly, his narrative arc is a lot more recognizable to us than most adventure stories.
Lord Jim A tall, powerfully built young man with piercing blue eyes and a deep voice. On his first assignment at sea, aboard the Patna, Jim abandons 800 Moslem pilgrims because he thinks that the ship is going to explode momentarily. Afterward, he is terribly ashamed and unable to live a normal life because he fears that his terrible cowardice will be revealed. It is only after Jim becomes the overseer of a trading post in the far-off Malay Islands that he is able to regain his self-esteem and his sense of honor. Patna
Oh Jim. We want to like you, we really do. After all, you are the star of the show, and the whole novel revolves around you and your story. But you make it so hard by mucking things up all the time. Plus, it can get pretty confusing for us readers to suss out just who you are. How are we supposed to know the real you, when this Marlow guy keeps meddling?
When we first meet Grayson, frankly, he's a little depressing. Yes, he rescued Maniac, but he's an old guy doing a menial job, living at the Y. How'd he end up here, anyway? That's the million-dollar question.
Moll Flanders is the ultimate trickster. We spend four hundred pages with her and learn a bunch of intimate details about her life, including her romantic relationships, her sex life, and the status of her bank account, but we never learn her real name. We know almost everything and at the same time absolutely nothing. The more Moll tells us, the more she keeps to herself. By the end, we know that she was a born in prison, had five husbands, became a criminal, and then redeemed herself. But still, we're left wondering, just who is this girl? And if you're curious about all this trickery, check out our Theme sections on "Identity," "Authorship," and "Criminality," and then come back here to read more about Moll.
Moll's real mother is less character, more plot device. She comes and goes so quickly that we hardly have the chance to get to know here. And neither does Moll for that matter. Nevertheless, it's this mother who gives birth to Moll in prison and starts her life on its – shall we say eventful? – journey. Because of her mom's petty thievery, Moll is born in prison. Her mother is then exiled to America when Moll is still a baby, and Moll grows up never knowing her. If you wanted to go there, you could even argue that it's her mother's fault that Moll ends up in that unfortunate situation with the Colchester brothers. If she'd grown up with her parents that probably wouldn't have happened.
Adam The first human, created by God from the dust of Earth. He is part of God's creation after the rebellious angels have been defeated. At first Adam (and Eve) can talk with angels and seem destined to become like angels if they follow God's commands. Adam eats the fruit of the Tree of Knowledge because he cannot bear losing Eve. His inordinate desire for Eve is his downfall. He and Eve feud after the fall but are reconciled. They eventually go forth together to face the world and death.
Adam is an incredibly important man, but not for what he actually does in the poem. He's important because of what he's destined to do. You see, he's God's first-born human – the "First man, of men innumerable ordained" (8.297) – and so he's the root from which a magnificent family tree (if we do say so ourselves) known as the human race will develop. In Milton's words: "Out of one man a race/ Of men innumerable" (7.155-156). Now we know Adam isn't the most exciting character. He's kind of dull and he puts too much stock in Eve's beauty. Yeah, she's really, really, REALLY beautiful and hot, but his love for her is partly the cause of his ruin. Near the end of Book 8, he and Raphael are discussing this very issue, and Adam says all kinds of stuff about how astonishingly gorgeous Eve is. Adam gets so carried away that Raphael tells him to chill out and not let her beauty cause him to make bad decisions. It's almost like Raphael has to tell him not to think with his you-know-what. Now, this becomes really important later because Adam ends up doing what his wife encourages him to do (dividing their labor; eating the Forbidden fruit) because he can't refuse her beauty.The fact of the matter is, we all see aspects of ourselves in Adam. You know how hard it can be to resist the pleadings of your super-hot boyfriend/girlfriend? Surely we can be just a little sympathetic. And Milton is somewhat unclear as well; after the Fall, he says that Adam was not "deceived," but rather "fondly overcome with female charm" (9.998-999). Is Milton saying that Adam wasn't tricked because he's too smart for that? Or is he saying that Adam is so weak that he fell prey to his wife's "charm[s]"?Either way, Adam (and Eve) pays the price; he has to leave Paradise, and on top of that he has to learn about the horrible events (narrated in Books 11-12) that will happen as a result of his and Eve's behavior. In some respects, then, he resembles other literary characters entrusted with the burden of painful knowledge (Jonas from The Giver comes to mind; head over to our guide for more!). Notice how Adam doesn't tell Eve about all this stuff; we don't know if he ever does. In some respects he's like a parent or older brother that knows lots and lots of bad things that he doesn't necessarily want to share with his younger, more innocent siblings. Just think of him as someone who has to watch horrible war footage that the public isn't allowed to see. Would you want him to tell you about it?But not all knowledge in this poem is bad, however, and Adam is also the figure through whom Milton reveals his own theories about what God was really up to with that whole Tree of Knowledge business. People have often complained that, because the tree was forbidden, knowledge was forbidden. The Bible doesn't really say anything about this, so Milton fills in the blanks with his own theory. In Paradise Lost he argues that Adam and Eve will eventually acquire the knowledge they don't yet possess. This is the whole point of Raphael and Adam's conversation in Books 5-8. In Book 5 Raphael tells him flat out that eventually, he will know everything he wants to know and then some. The real sin that Adam ends up committing, then, is not the knowledge he gains, but rather the proleptic (i.e., before the proper time) knowledge that he gains. In other words, he tries to walk before he's learned to crawl. Or, better, he takes his daddy's truck out before he's even gotten his learner's permit. Why do you think Adam's premature education is such a bad thing? What role does time play here?
The first human, the father of our race, and, along with his wife Eve, the caretaker of the Garden of Eden. Adam is grateful and obedient to God, but falls from grace when Eve convinces him to join her in the sin of eating from the Tree of Knowledge.
Maxim is totally gothic. He's a prudish, brooding figure with sinister secrets, whose temper is always on the verge of erupting. He's simultaneously a tortured soul and a calculating arch-manipulator. At forty-two, he's handsome, wealthy, and the proud owner of Manderley, a huge estate with a castle-like mansion. Maxim would be right at home in an Edgar Allan Poe story or a Brontë novel. Maxim escapes official justice for murdering his wife Rebecca, whom he believes to be pregnant with another man's child. While his murderous act defines Maxim for many readers, we don't learn about it until late in the book. At that point, we've already built up some sympathy for him. Our early view of Maxim is mostly through the eyes of his second wife, known only as Mrs. de Winter, and she's head over heels in love with him. We think Maxim belongs in a long line of fictional folks characterized by a dual nature, like Harvey Dent/Two Face, or Dr. Jekyll/Mr. Hyde. Within such characters, both good and evil are at war, and repressed desires are always bubbling up to the surface.
Our title character is a puzzle we can never completely solve; the more we think about her, the more she eludes us. Our knowledge about Rebecca is filtered through the narrator, and because she's the second wife of Rebecca's husband, we can't be sure all of our narrator's information is quite reliable. Through this narrative filter, we hear about Rebecca from a variety of different people who knew her. The chief sources of information about Rebecca – Mrs. Danvers, Maxim, and Favell – are extremely unreliable and maybe even insane. Ben offers some persuasive testimony about her, but Ben's grasp on reality and his motivations are questionable. We don't read any of Rebecca's personal writings, and she never actually appears in the story. Her power over the other characters seems entirely of their own making. Yet, things are left open enough to tantalize us with the possibility that Rebecca is somehow reaching from out from the grave. Once we sift through the various takes on Rebecca, we can safely identify a few character traits. We know that she's cover-girl beautiful, extremely charming, and hospitable. We also know that she's really talented at organizing fabulous parties and an expert at running a mansion. We know she excels in every kind of sport, from hunting to horse riding to sailing. She seems fearless and independent. Of course, this is the surface view, which the unreliable characters are trying shave away to expose the "real" Rebecca.
Robinson Crusoe The narrator of the story. Crusoe sets sail at nineteen years of age, despite his father's demand that he stay at home and be content with his "middle station" in life. Crusoe eventually establishes a farm in Brazil and realizes he is living the life his father planned for him, but he is half a world away from England. Crusoe agrees to sail to the Guinea Coast to trade for slaves, but when a terrible storm blows up, he is marooned on an island, alone. He spends 35 years there, and his time on the island forms the basis of the novel.
Robinson Crusoe was one of the bestselling novels in the year 1719 and its hero, our friend Mr. Crusoe, was a man very much of his 18th-century moment. His continued staying power over the years suggests that the values he represented in 18th-century England have resonated with readers for centuries since. What kind of values, though, does Crusoe embody? Well, let's get down to brass tacks.
The novel’s protagonist and narrator. Crusoe begins the novel as a young middle-class man in York in search of a career. He father recommends the law, but Crusoe yearns for a life at sea, and his subsequent rebellion and decision to become a merchant is the starting point for the whole adventure that follows. His vague but recurring feelings of guilt over his disobedience color the first part of the first half of the story and show us how deep Crusoe’s religious fear is. Crusoe is steady and plodding in everything he does, and his perseverance ensures his survival through storms, enslavement, and a twenty-eight-year isolation on a desert island.
Melinda is the young star of Speak. Since she's also the narrator, everything we learn about the other characters is filtered through her. Melinda is very perceptive and bright, but her vision is sometimes clouded by her suffering. She's only fourteen-years-old, and she's dealing with one of the worst things that can happen to a person: rape. High school senior Andy Evans rapes Melinda at the end-of-summer party just before Melinda starts 9th grade. She calls the cops to report the rape, but leaves before they show up. The party is busted and everybody thinks Melinda got them in trouble on purpose. The novel begins on Melinda's first day in high school. Nobody at school will talk to Melinda, including Rachel Bruin, who's been her best friend forever. Worse, just about everyone bullies her. She wants to explain why she called the cops but she can't find the words. Melinda doesn't stop talking altogether, but says only what seems absolutely necessary. As her secret weighs on her more and more, she talks less and less. Eventually she decides that talking is necessary to protect others from Andy and to find personal relief. Speak follows Melinda through her first year of high school, from the depths of her isolation to the beginnings of her renewal.
Melinda's mom is the hardworking manager of Effert's, a downtown clothing store. She's a practical, busy woman, who struggles to balance home and career. In contrast, Melinda's dad sells insurance, and Melinda thinks Dad's job is too easy and resents what she sees as his freedom. Melinda thinks that Mom and Dad are unhappily married. We don't know how close Melinda is with her parents before the rape, but it's unlikely they spent hours and hours in deep conversation. Readers are likely to have mixed reactions about Mom and Dad. They are hard to get a fix on because Melinda is so torn about them. Melinda clearly wants to tell them about the rape. However, because they seem unwilling or unable to see that Melinda really needs help and that something has hurt her, Melinda is less willing to confide. Mom goes as far as to say that Melinda's bad grades, silence, and skipping school are pleas for attention. Well, yes…or we could call them cries for help. Dad almost gets it. He thinks Melinda is under the influence of some bad high school kids or teachers. Yes again, but he's so not stretching his imagination far enough. Melinda's lip biting, wrist scratching, and silence are all signs probably meant most of all for Mom and Dad. She doesn't know how to ask for help, so gets more and more extreme in the hopes they will do what Mr. Freeman does: ask, not demand, that she talk to them if she wants to. It's likely that Mom and Dad are just as clueless as Melinda about rape and its aftermath. Melinda exhibits some signs that seem to be common among victims of violent attacks and other trauma. Through Mom and Dad, Speak makes the argument that parents need to be educated too, in hopes that they can respond helpfully if tragedy strikes their child.
Son of Evander, whom Evander entrusts to Aeneas’s care and tutelage. Pallas eventually dies in battle at the hands of Turnus, causing Aeneas and Evander great grief. To avenge Pallas’s death, Aeneas finally slays Turnus, dismissing an initial impulse to spare him.
We know next to nothing about Liesel's father. Liesel has no memories of him, but has heard he was a communist. The German Communist Party (KPD) was a political party in Germany when Hitler took power. As a popular party, members were seen as a threat to the Nazis. The novel implies that something bad happened to Liesel's dad because of his communist political views.
The protagonist of the story. Liesel changes from an angry, distrusting character to one who deeply loves her family and friends. By the end of the book she has a strong personal moral code, and is not afraid to endanger herself to enforce it.
In a lot of ways, fourteen-year-old Jerry Renault is a pretty typical teen. He's trying to make quarterback and to do well in school. He's also trying his best to be a good son to his recently widowed father. However, his father's boring repetitive life is starting to freak Jerry out. He worries about ending up like his dad – always stuck in the same routine. This all changes when our boy Jerry starts his freshman year at Trinity, a boys' Catholic high school. Suddenly, the question of whether or not to conform and go with the flow becomes of life-or-death importance.
The protagonist of the story. Jerry decides that he dares to disturb the universe. He single-handedly takes on the biggest bullies in school—both a gang of kids and a crooked teacher. Jerry does not complain or rat on the people making his life hell. Rather, he deals with them quietly, with his own silent protest. He is an admirable character that shows strength and individualism, but in the end pays for those qualities.
Una's name, which means "oneness," is deceptively simple—kind of like her. While "one" might seem like a pretty basic, uninspired name, it actually encapsulates two qualities that Una embodies: the unity of Truth and the One true church… and yes, they are related. Una's gender also anticipates a common binary that will continue to come up in the text: women are either the embodiment of total purity, like Una ("So pure and innocent, as that same lambe,/ She was in life and every virtuous lore" (I.i.5)) or they embody a perception that women have a dangerous, and potentially uncontrollable, sexuality, like Una's evil counterpart, Duessa. Sadly, this extremely reductive binary often informed how women were viewed during Spenser's time… and, unfortunately, at times even today.
Howard Roark The hero of the story. It is his struggle to succeed as an architect on his own terms that forms the essence of the novel's conflict. His independent functioning serves as a standard by which to judge the other characters — either they are like Roark or they allow others, in one form or another, to control their lives. Roark is the embodiment of the great innovative thinkers who have carried mankind forward but are often opposed by their societies.
Howard Roark: you either love him or you hate him. You either succumb to his enigmatic charms or you find him to be a sinister dirtbag. To call him polarizing is the understatement of the century. Most people credit him with having a boatload of artistic talent, but when it comes to liking or respecting him it's a whole different story. Not surprisingly, this is exactly how people feel about Rand herself. There is no gray area surrounding Rand. There is no "Uh, yeah, I like her all right" or "She's okay, I guess?" People either are Rand fanboys or hate her with a white-hot passion. And Roark, for all intents and purposes, is Ayn Rand's mouthpiece in The Fountainhead.
The novel’s hero, a brilliant architect of absolute integrity. Roark has friends and colleagues, but relies on himself alone. He is tall, gaunt, and angular, with gray eyes and distinctive orange hair. Born to a poor family, Roark supports himself throughout high school and college by working odd jobs on construction sites. He brings the same fiery intensity to whatever job he does, whether it is manual labor or architecture. He loves the beautiful Dominique Francon with violent passion. He is the novel’s idealization of man, bringing innovative and joyful buildings to the rest of the world.
Peter Keating The foil to Roark. He lacks the backbone to ever stand alone, and spends his life forever seeking the approval of others. He even codifies his toadying attitude into a formal principle: "Always be what people want you to be." Keating is an outstanding example of a status-seeking conformist.
If you've ever watched Mad Men you'll be familiar with a character named Pete Campbell, who is so utterly hate-worthy that his awfulness gets its very own listicle. What makes Pete Campbell so absolutely horrible? He's superficial and vain and he's so concerned with what other people think that he almost never thinks for himself. He wants social advancement and marries a wealthy society woman for political reasons. He's good at shmoozing and he's jealous of people with real talent. Basically, Pete Campbell is Peter Keating. Thanks, Pete and Keating, for ruining our opinion of what is actually a very nice first name. Jerk(s). Peter Keating goes on a bumpy ride throughout the course of The Fountainhead. He starts out on top of the world, thanks to his second-to-none networking skillz and his ability to be comfortable anywhere: He had always known how to become part of any place he entered; he came soft and bright as a sponge to be filled, unresisting, with the air and the mood of the place. (1.4.19) Yes, Ayn Rand, a writer without an ounce of subtlety in her prose, compares Peter Keating to a sponge. She might as well have inserted a glittery flashing sign that reads, "Keating is spineless. Hate him." But because Keating is so totally devoted to schmoozing and making everyone love him, he often feels completely out of control. It's no surprise that, since he's left his fate in the hands of people higher up the architecture pecking order than he is, "Keating (often) felt as if a conveyer belt was under his feet, from the moment he crossed the threshold (1.3.5)." Peter Keating is a sponge with a dark side. He's a liar and a cheater. He gets Roark to do work for him. He abandons his true love Katie for selfish reasons. He helps to kill Lucius Heyer by threatening and raging at him. He testifies against Roark, twice. The list goes on: Keating is often a dirtbag. And yet… we still kind of like Keating. In a novel full of people that are Very Good and Very Bad and Very Icy, Peter Keating is just human. He's deeply flawed and he makes awful decisions, but he often tries to do better and be better. Keating's story is ultimately a tragic one, but his story-line helps to demonstrate how difficult it is to be a strong individual in the world of The Fountainhead and, indeed, in the real world.
A classmate of Roark’s who lives only for fame and the approval of others. Keating is good-looking and commercially successful, but he steals his only original ideas from Roark. In order to rise to the top, Keating flatters, lies, steals, kills, and even trades his wife, Dominique, for the opportunity to work on a promising project. His fall is even more rapid than his rise. He realizes the error of his ways too late and lives the rest of his life in frightened misery.
Anyone who nicknames himself the Great Brain and constantly refers to his "great brain" (no citation here, because we do mean constantly) clearly doesn't lack confidence or cleverness. And so it is with Tom, a.k.a. the Great Brain. Let's start with the cleverness, because that's what drives him (and what drives his parents crazy). There's no question that Tom is smart. But while he is book smart, he is also incredibly clever, able to think through any problem—or any objection to his schemes—thrown at him: Aunt Bertha shook her head. "I tell you, Tena, that boy could talk his way around anything." "He gets it from his father," Mamma said as if she was proud of Tom instead of angry with him for marching ten kids across her clean kitchen floor. (1.51-52) Bolstering his cleverness, as Aunt Bertha touches on here, is Tom's confidence. In fact, we might say he's downright cocky about his ability to accomplish any task he sets his mind to. Check out his after-action report on the rescue in Skeleton Cave: "When I learned that Uncle Mark and the search party were about ready to give up the search as hopeless," he said, with about as much modesty as a plucked chicken in the window of the Deseret Meat Market, "I knew the only way to save Frank and Allan and Lady was to put my great brain to work. I would have done it sooner, but I wanted to give the grown-ups every chance. When they failed, I knew it was up to me to save the day. And now, folks, please go home. I've got to rest up my great brain so it will be ready the next time something happens which you grown-ups can't solve." (3.209) To hear Tom tell it, if it weren't for him and his "great brain," Frank, Allan, and Lady would have been lost for good. Good thing he was around to save the day.
Jay Gatsby The protagonist who gives his name to the story. Gatsby is a newly wealthy Midwesterner-turned-Easterner who orders his life around one desire: to be reunited with Daisy Buchanan, the love he lost five years earlier. His quest for the American dream leads him from poverty to wealth, into the arms of his beloved and, eventually, to death.
If you invented a persona based entirely on reruns of Laguna Beach, you might come up with something a lot like The Great Gatsby's Jay Gatsby: a fabulously embellished, impossibly perfect reflection of a kid's dreams and fantasies. Let's take a look at how he got there.
The title character and protagonist of the novel, Gatsby is a fabulously wealthy young man living in a Gothic mansion in West Egg. He is famous for the lavish parties he throws every Saturday night, but no one knows where he comes from, what he does, or how he made his fortune. As the novel progresses, Nick learns that Gatsby was born James Gatz on a farm in North Dakota; working for a millionaire made him dedicate his life to the achievement of wealth. When he met Daisy while training to be an officer in Louisville, he fell in love with her. Nick also learns that Gatsby made his fortune through criminal activity, as he was willing to do anything to gain the social position he thought necessary to win Daisy. Nick views Gatsby as a deeply flawed man, dishonest and vulgar, whose extraordinary optimism and power to transform his dreams into reality make him “great” nonetheless.
Skeeter Phelan is a bundle of contradictions. She's a 23-year-old white woman with a cotton trust fund and a college degree. She lives at home on her family's cotton plantation, Longleaf. And she devotes herself, at considerable risk, to a book featuring the real stories of the black women who work for the white families in her hometown of Jackson, Mississippi. Contradictions abound, indeed. She belongs to the Junior League and is in tight with other high-society ladies. She's been best friends with Hilly Holbrook and Elizabeth Leefolt (villainous characters) since grade school. But as the story progresses, Skeeter becomes more and more distanced from this safe social status and goes, as they say, rogue. She breaks all the rules and crosses dangerous lines – and we love her for it. What cinches her new position of social outcast is the prank she plays on Hilly, who is trying to get a bill passed requiring Mississippi families to build outdoor bathrooms for their black employees. Well, Skeeter arranges for dozens of toilets to be dumped on Hilly's lawn, and got a big laugh out of us, at the very least. Hilly doesn't take this calmly, though, and turns Skeeter into a social pariah. So much so that Skeeter compares herself to outcast Boo Radley in To Kill a Mockingbird, which she's been reading (even though it's a banned book in Mississippi). She fears, somewhat jokingly, that like Boo, she'll choose to stay inside to hide from the ugliness of society. As Skeeter's own friends shun her, the black community embraces her, though not openly (because it's too dangerous). After the release of Help, the preacher at Aibileen's church asks Aibileen to tell Skeeter "we love her like, like she's our own family" (29.107). After you read The Help, you'll probably love her too. She's brave, kind, and looking for the truth. She narrates thirteen chapters of The Help.
If you were to take a look at our protagonist, you'd see a young woman. And you'd probably like what you saw, because she's athletic and attractive. But you wouldn't actually be looking at her. That's because she's not human. She's an alien, a parasite for a lack of a better term, living inside a human host's body.
Katniss’s and Peeta’s trainer. He is a drunk and one of only two people from District 12 to win the Hunger Games (and the only one still living).
Ladies and gentleman, a brief statement of the facts: Katniss Everdeen is a teenage girl who lives in District 12, an impoverished coal-mining region in the country of Panem. She's a volunteer tribute in Panem's annual Hunger Games, having taken the place of her younger sister in an act of heroic self-sacrifice. Likes include: bows, arrows, and lamb stew. Also: a certain guy named Gale. Dislikes include: Haymitch Abernathy, tracker jacker stings, getting her leg hair waxed, and the family cat. Also: occasionally her mother. Now that we know just enough about the heroine of The Hunger Games to fill out her Facebook profile, let's get down to brass tacks: Who is Katniss Everdeen? Who is she really? Ever since the death of her father in a tragic coal-mining accident, Katniss has taken on the role of her family's head of household. While Katniss's mother was unable to cope with the loss, falling into a deep depression, Katniss stayed focused and took charge. Filling her father's shoes, she became the chief cook and bottlewasher, bringing home the food and income that would save the family from starvation. Katniss describes the process as follows: It was slow-going at first, but I was determined to feed us. I stole eggs from nests, caught fish in nets, sometimes managed to shoot a squirrel or rabbit for stew, and gathered the various plants that sprung up beneath my feet. Plants are tricky. Many are edible, but one false mouthful and you're dead. I checked and double-checked the plants I harvested with my father's pictures. I kept us alive. (4.19) Katniss is the stalwart rock of her family. Hunting, foraging, and providing for her mother and sister Prim are at the very core of her identity. While Katniss's role as a provider originated within the context of her family, Katniss is a strong provider in the arena as well. Her protective instincts extend to her ally from District 11, the young girl named Rue. The two shared food, clothing, and companionship. Katniss explains that she teamed up with the girl "because she's a survivor, and I trust her, and why not admit it? She reminds me of Prim" (15.28). While her alliance with Rue is sadly short-lived, Katniss will also act as provider and protector of another tribute: her co-tribute from District 12, Peeta Mellark. The daughter of a coal miner, Katniss is a far more skilled hunter and tracker than Peeta, who is the son of a baker. He's a whiz at "decorating cakes," sure, but he's really not very good with weapons (19.25). As the Games near their climax, Katniss will risk her life against the other tributes in order to bring Peeta the only medicine that can bring him back from the edge of death. While Katniss sees herself primarily as someone who others can depend upon, both in and out of the arena, who would Katniss be if she didn't have to provide for and protect the people around her? As there becomes a likely possibility that she might win the Hunger Games, she lets herself ask this question: For the first time, I allow myself to truly think about the possibility that I might make it home. To fame. To wealth. To my own house in the Victor's Village. My mother and Prim would live there with me. No more fear of hunger. A new kind of freedom. But then…what? What would my life be like on a daily basis? Most of it has been consumed with the acquisition of food. Take that away and I'm not really sure who I am, what my identity is. The idea scares me some. (23.62) Though the question is left unresolved at the conclusion of The Hunger Games, you can bet your bottom dollar that Katniss will have to find a new role for herself – a new identity – once she returns home to District 12. It's been a hardknock life for Katniss. As Peeta's mom comments, rather coldly, "She's a survivor, that one" (7.31). Whether she's in the woods of District 12 or the Gamemaker's arena, Katniss is concerned with one thing: how to stay alive. This, of course, makes her a fierce competitor. She can hunt, fish, trap, and fight. While we might be putting money on Katniss to win, some might say that her survivalist mindset also makes her a hardened character – someone difficult to like. We, as readers, want to see people fall in love and be happy, after all. Katniss, though, doesn't get attached to people very easily – or to things. Warm, fuzzy emotions are a luxury that she just can't afford. Because she is only focused on the day-to-day work of living, Katniss isn't terribly sentimental – a characteristic that sets her apart from many other girl heroines (think of Bella from Twilight) and from Peeta. She has no great love for the family cat, Buttercup, for example. To Katniss, Buttercup isn't a cute and fuzzy playmate, but simply "another mouth to feed" (1.3). This would explain, we guess, why she tried to drown the poor thing in a bucket – to save him from the slow, sad fate of starvation. Similarly, Katniss doesn't go gaga for children or babies. She can't even imagine herself having children, as she tells Gale: "Who would fill those mouths that are always asking for more?" (1.28). Katniss lives in a world with no future. Why would she bring children into such a life of pain, sorrow, and poverty? As Morrissey once sang, "Fame, fame, fatal fame. It can play hideous tricks on the brain." Indeed, in the televised world of the Hunger Games, fame and celebrity can turn your world completely upside down. As the girl tribute from District 12, Katniss is thrust into the spotlight when she hits the Capitol. Cameras are on her every move at every minute; unfortunately, though, she's not funny or charming or even particularly telegenic. As Haymitch puts it, whenever she opens her mouth, she comes across as "sullen and hostile" (9.17). She's like a Panem version of Kristen Stewart. So, Katniss must learn the importance of public image, celebrity, and creating a persona. With the help of her stylist, Cinna, she'll wear a series of spectacular gowns with which she'll be able to woo and wow the crowds at the Opening Ceremonies. Likewise, by following Haymitch's coaching and advice, she learns to manipulate the at-home audiences of the Hunger Games by playing up the supposed romance plot with her co-tribute Peeta. Once she's made into Peeta's object of love, she secures a powerful place in the hearts of the audience. Haymitch explains: "It's all a big show. It's all how you're perceived. The most I could say about you after your interview was that you were nice enough, although that in itself was s small miracle. Now I can say you're a heartbreaker. Oh, oh, oh, how the boys back home fall longingly at your feet. Which do you think will get you more sponsors?" (10.24) Katniss becomes a pro at playing the game of celebrity, and at playing the audiences and sponsors of the Hunger Games. But she'll also learn that the distinctions between what's real and what's not can sometimes blur. What are the stakes of living a life based solely on appearances? Cinna is Katniss's fabulous stylist in the Capitol, and the image that he creates for her is designed around the concept of (drumroll please) FIRE! More specifically, being on fire. Cinna accomplishes this feat through gowns that shimmer and elaborate capes that are set off in flames. Take, for example, Katniss's getup at the inaugural event of the Games:Every head is turned our way, pulling the focus from the three chariots ahead of us. At first, I'm frozen, but then I catch sight of us on a large television screen and am floored by how breathtaking we look. In the deepening twilight, the firelight illuminates our faces. (5.56) The flaming spectacle has mass appeal and the crowd goes wild. Katniss's girl on fire bit is a hit. But, while Katniss might literally be on fire in Cinna's dresses, we should also remember that she is on fire in other ways too. She's rebellious, for one thing. Remember when she shot her arrow through the apple in the pig's mouth during her private training sessions with the Gamemakers (Chapter 7)? Or when she defiantly covered Rue's body with flowers (Chapter 18)? Or when she attempts a double suicide with Peeta at the climax of the Hunger Games (Chapter 25)? Katniss has a temper that just won't quit, and her defiance, she learns, can be a huge asset in the arena. Being on fire with her own personal brand of rebellion can be even more powerful than one of Cinna's amazing dresses. Her defiance brands her as spectacular and appealing…and dangerous. Who does Katniss love, and who doesn't she love? Let's break it down:
Ladies and gentleman, a brief statement of the facts: Katniss Everdeen is a teenage girl who lives in District 12, an impoverished coal-mining region in the country of Panem. She's a volunteer tribute in Panem's annual Hunger Games, having taken the place of her younger sister in an act of heroic self-sacrifice. Likes include: bows, arrows, and lamb stew. Also: a certain guy named Gale. Dislikes include: Haymitch Abernathy, tracker jacker stings, getting her leg hair waxed, and the family cat. Also: occasionally her mother. Now that we know just enough about the heroine of The Hunger Games to fill out her Facebook profile, let's get down to brass tacks: Who is Katniss Everdeen? Who is she really? Ever since the death of her father in a tragic coal-mining accident, Katniss has taken on the role of her family's head of household. While Katniss's mother was unable to cope with the loss, falling into a deep depression, Katniss stayed focused and took charge. Filling her father's shoes, she became the chief cook and bottlewasher, bringing home the food and income that would save the family from starvation. Katniss describes the process as follows: It was slow-going at first, but I was determined to feed us. I stole eggs from nests, caught fish in nets, sometimes managed to shoot a squirrel or rabbit for stew, and gathered the various plants that sprung up beneath my feet. Plants are tricky. Many are edible, but one false mouthful and you're dead. I checked and double-checked the plants I harvested with my father's pictures. I kept us alive. (4.19) Katniss is the stalwart rock of her family. Hunting, foraging, and providing for her mother and sister Prim are at the very core of her identity. While Katniss's role as a provider originated within the context of her family, Katniss is a strong provider in the arena as well. Her protective instincts extend to her ally from District 11, the young girl named Rue. The two shared food, clothing, and companionship. Katniss explains that she teamed up with the girl "because she's a survivor, and I trust her, and why not admit it? She reminds me of Prim" (15.28). While her alliance with Rue is sadly short-lived, Katniss will also act as provider and protector of another tribute: her co-tribute from District 12, Peeta Mellark. The daughter of a coal miner, Katniss is a far more skilled hunter and tracker than Peeta, who is the son of a baker. He's a whiz at "decorating cakes," sure, but he's really not very good with weapons (19.25). As the Games near their climax, Katniss will risk her life against the other tributes in order to bring Peeta the only medicine that can bring him back from the edge of death. While Katniss sees herself primarily as someone who others can depend upon, both in and out of the arena, who would Katniss be if she didn't have to provide for and protect the people around her? As there becomes a likely possibility that she might win the Hunger Games, she lets herself ask this question: For the first time, I allow myself to truly think about the possibility that I might make it home. To fame. To wealth. To my own house in the Victor's Village. My mother and Prim would live there with me. No more fear of hunger. A new kind of freedom. But then…what? What would my life be like on a daily basis? Most of it has been consumed with the acquisition of food. Take that away and I'm not really sure who I am, what my identity is. The idea scares me some. (23.62) Though the question is left unresolved at the conclusion of The Hunger Games, you can bet your bottom dollar that Katniss will have to find a new role for herself – a new identity – once she returns home to District 12. It's been a hardknock life for Katniss. As Peeta's mom comments, rather coldly, "She's a survivor, that one" (7.31). Whether she's in the woods of District 12 or the Gamemaker's arena, Katniss is concerned with one thing: how to stay alive. This, of course, makes her a fierce competitor. She can hunt, fish, trap, and fight. While we might be putting money on Katniss to win, some might say that her survivalist mindset also makes her a hardened character – someone difficult to like. We, as readers, want to see people fall in love and be happy, after all. Katniss, though, doesn't get attached to people very easily – or to things. Warm, fuzzy emotions are a luxury that she just can't afford. Because she is only focused on the day-to-day work of living, Katniss isn't terribly sentimental – a characteristic that sets her apart from many other girl heroines (think of Bella from Twilight) and from Peeta. She has no great love for the family cat, Buttercup, for example. To Katniss, Buttercup isn't a cute and fuzzy playmate, but simply "another mouth to feed" (1.3). This would explain, we guess, why she tried to drown the poor thing in a bucket – to save him from the slow, sad fate of starvation. Similarly, Katniss doesn't go gaga for children or babies. She can't even imagine herself having children, as she tells Gale: "Who would fill those mouths that are always asking for more?" (1.28). Katniss lives in a world with no future. Why would she bring children into such a life of pain, sorrow, and poverty? As Morrissey once sang, "Fame, fame, fatal fame. It can play hideous tricks on the brain." Indeed, in the televised world of the Hunger Games, fame and celebrity can turn your world completely upside down. As the girl tribute from District 12, Katniss is thrust into the spotlight when she hits the Capitol. Cameras are on her every move at every minute; unfortunately, though, she's not funny or charming or even particularly telegenic. As Haymitch puts it, whenever she opens her mouth, she comes across as "sullen and hostile" (9.17). She's like a Panem version of Kristen Stewart. So, Katniss must learn the importance of public image, celebrity, and creating a persona. With the help of her stylist, Cinna, she'll wear a series of spectacular gowns with which she'll be able to woo and wow the crowds at the Opening Ceremonies. Likewise, by following Haymitch's coaching and advice, she learns to manipulate the at-home audiences of the Hunger Games by playing up the supposed romance plot with her co-tribute Peeta. Once she's made into Peeta's object of love, she secures a powerful place in the hearts of the audience. Haymitch explains: "It's all a big show. It's all how you're perceived. The most I could say about you after your interview was that you were nice enough, although that in itself was s small miracle. Now I can say you're a heartbreaker. Oh, oh, oh, how the boys back home fall longingly at your feet. Which do you think will get you more sponsors?" (10.24) Katniss becomes a pro at playing the game of celebrity, and at playing the audiences and sponsors of the Hunger Games. But she'll also learn that the distinctions between what's real and what's not can sometimes blur. What are the stakes of living a life based solely on appearances? Cinna is Katniss's fabulous stylist in the Capitol, and the image that he creates for her is designed around the concept of (drumroll please) FIRE! More specifically, being on fire. Cinna accomplishes this feat through gowns that shimmer and elaborate capes that are set off in flames. Take, for example, Katniss's getup at the inaugural event of the Games:Every head is turned our way, pulling the focus from the three chariots ahead of us. At first, I'm frozen, but then I catch sight of us on a large television screen and am floored by how breathtaking we look. In the deepening twilight, the firelight illuminates our faces. (5.56) The flaming spectacle has mass appeal and the crowd goes wild. Katniss's girl on fire bit is a hit. But, while Katniss might literally be on fire in Cinna's dresses, we should also remember that she is on fire in other ways too. She's rebellious, for one thing. Remember when she shot her arrow through the apple in the pig's mouth during her private training sessions with the Gamemakers (Chapter 7)? Or when she defiantly covered Rue's body with flowers (Chapter 18)? Or when she attempts a double suicide with Peeta at the climax of the Hunger Games (Chapter 25)? Katniss has a temper that just won't quit, and her defiance, she learns, can be a huge asset in the arena. Being on fire with her own personal brand of rebellion can be even more powerful than one of Cinna's amazing dresses. Her defiance brands her as spectacular and appealing…and dangerous. Who does Katniss love, and who doesn't she love? Let's break it down:
the protagonist and female tribute of District 12. She is an excellent hunter and tremendously resourceful
the protagonist and female tribute of District 12. She is an excellent hunter and tremendously resourceful
Prince Lyov Nikolayevitch Myshkin Twenty-six years old; very thick, fair hair; slightly above medium height; large ice-blue eyes, hollow cheeks; thin, almost white, little beard. Myshkin lost his parents when he was a child and spent his life in the country; because of his epileptic attacks, he was sent to a Swiss clinic by his guardian Pavlishtchev.
An epileptic young man—an example of a perfectly good person. Myshkin travels from a Swiss clinic to Petersburg to find a place for himself in Russia. Instead, he stumbles into a series of love triangles that ultimately doom their participants.
The hero and protagonist of the novel. Myshkin is a descendant of an old noble line and a distant relative of Madame Yepanchin. He is a fair-haired, blue-eyed epileptic in his late twenties. He comes to Russia after an absence of four years spent in a sanitarium in Switzerland. Myshkin is innocent, naïve, impractical, compassionate, and immensely kind, which leads most characters in the novel to consider him an "idiot."
Amir The narrator and protagonist; a Pashtun and Sunni Muslim.
Like most good narrator-protagonists, Amir is a fairly complex character because the reader not only has to pay attention to Amir's actions but also how Amir describes his actions. Plus, Amir grows up, changes, and is affected by where he's living – whether that's Afghanistan or California. With this in mind, we analyzed Amir's character in each of the major settings of the novel. As we've stressed elsewhere, some really major events happen early in the novel. Thus, we'll spend the bulk of our time on Amir's childhood.
The narrator and the protagonist of the story. Amir is the sensitive and intelligent son of a well-to-do businessman in Kabul, and he grows up with a sense of entitlement. His best friend is Hassan, and he goes back and forth between acting as a loyal friend and attacking Hassan out of jealousy whenever Hassan receives Amir’s father’s affection. Amir is a gifted storyteller and grows from aspiring writer to published novelist. His great desire to please his father is the primary motivation for his behavior early in the novel, and it is the main reason he allows Hassan to be raped. From that point forward, he is driven by his feelings of guilt as he searches to find a way to redeem himself. Ultimately he does so through courage and self-sacrifice, and he tells his story as a form of penance.
Susie is the hero and the starring ghost of The Lovely Bones. She's only fourteen when she's beaten, raped, and murdered by her neighbor, Mr. Harvey. She tells us her story from the afterworld. Part vengeful ghost, part wise sage, part hyper-romantic and sexually frustrated teen, Susie provides a fresh (though definitely ghostly) perspective on Earthly happenings, and on how the dead and the living interact.
Name: Sam SpadeHeight: 6'0''Eyes: Yellowish grayHair: Pale brown, almost blondAge: 30sClothing: Gray suit, tweed overcoat, green necktie, dark gray fedora If the cops had a file on Sam Spade, this is how his police report would look. But even though Spade isn't exactly in the police department's good graces, he's still supposed to be on their side. As a private detective, Spade has a professional code of ethics that he follows most of the time (but of course, not all of the time). What do we mean by a professional code of ethics? Spade's #1 rule is to protect his clients, whether that means putting himself in harm's way or even breaking the law to keep his clients safe. But what about when Spade isn't on the job? Does he have a personal code of ethics that's separate from his professional code? We'll get to that answer a bit later on, so stay tuned.
Mark Watney is the man. When we first meet him, he's your average, run-of-the-mill botanist. Nothing special. By the end of the novel, however, he's a dang hero. Although Mark didn't choose to be stranded on Mars, he made the best of the situation he was given, using his personality, intellect, and determination to fight his way out of an impossible bind.
Odysseus The central figure in the epic, he employs guile as well as courage to return to Ithaca, defeat the suitors, and resume his proper place as king.
Odysseus is brave, strong, handsome, wily, loyal, pious—and did we mention handsome? He's basically begging for a "hey girl" meme. ("Hey girl. I may have spent seven years with a goddess, but you still look divine to me.) So, what makes this paragon of perfection so darn perfect?
The protagonist of the Odysseus fought among the other Greek heroes at Troy and now struggles to return to his kingdom in Ithaca. Odysseus is the husband of Queen Penelope and the father of Prince Telemachus. Though a strong and courageous warrior, he is most renowned for his cunning. He is a favorite of the goddess Athena, who often sends him divine aid, but a bitter enemy of Poseidon, who frustrates his journey at every turn.
Sherri (Cherry) Valance A cheerleader and the girlfriend of Bob, the Soc who is killed. Cherry and Ponyboy meet at the drive-in and become friends. Cherry is attracted to Dally, and becomes a spy for the greasers.
Johnny's parents are abusive—his mother verbally, and his father physically. They're both neglectful. Johnny refuses to see his mother when she comes to visit him in the hospital, and he takes his parents' treatment of him personally (as would most people). Lack of parental love appears to be the basis of his self-esteem problems.
We know, we know, he has quite a bit of a reputation, doesn't he? You'd probably heard of him before he wrote the book. You probably thought he was some kind of amoral, bloodthirsty psychopath. We won't blame you; his name is synonymous with evil politics. But let's get to know him a little better than that, shall we?
Getting on in years, cynical beyond repair, and uninvolved in people's lives as much as he can be, Thomas Fowler just wants to file the occasional news report, smoke opium, and chill with his young Vietnamese lover. He's living the easy life in Saigon, a reporter from England covering the Indochina War. He spends a lot of time at the hotel bar and rarely goes to press conferences or the scenes of battle. A classic Fowler line?: I'm a reporter. I'm not engagé. (2.2.3.58) Think a detached, live-and-let-live Michael Caine and you're in the ballpark. The actor played Fowler in the 2002 adaptation, and, really, we recommend you just picture Caine when reading the book. He was Alfred in the Nolan Dark Knight trilogy, and Austin Powers' dad, if you need help placing him.
A middle-aged British journalist. Fowler is both the narrator and the principal character of the novel a Vietnamese mistress named Phuong. As a reporter, he feels particularly concerned with maintaining a level of disinterest that is appropriate for his profession. He is a psychologically complicated character whose choices are frequently motivated by a fear of loneliness and death. Fowler prefers the concrete facts of reality to the more abstract thinking of political theorists. He disapproves strongly of American politics and society.
We think The Boy is a child prodigy. Not the usual sort, though. He's not a math whiz or a chess master or an amazing pianist. Rather, he's just surprisingly intelligent and mature.What do we mean by that? Well, most kids his age (the book doesn't say exactly how old he is, but a rough estimate would be 9 or 10) would totally flip out if they lived in such harsh conditions. But The Boy constantly thinks of others – the people on the road less fortunate than him, the people whose houses they stay in, and even the people on the road who want to harm him. His compassion inspires The Man to this love-fest late in the book: "You have my whole heart. You always did. You're the best guy. You always were" (381.21). Ah, shucks.The Boy also has moments of fear. Again and again, he begs The Man not to go upstairs or open cellar doors (an understandable fear after the human livestock discovery). He cries a lot, like any other kid would, and needs his father to comfort him. Sometimes he's difficult and unkind – like when he throws away the flute his father carved for him. And, like most children just coming to an understanding of the world, he can be self-righteous. For instance, The Man tries to keep their spirits up by telling stories of goodness and compassion, but The Boy reminds him that they rarely treat other people on the road with kindness.The Boy also grounds The Man. When The Man starts to spin off into highfalutin laments about the world he's lost, or to sink into self-pity (not that it isn't merited), The Boy brings him back. His simple exchanges with The Man – often ending with the word "Okay" – clarify the world for both The Man and The Boy. The Boy reminds The Man to stay focused on what's in front of him. McCarthy often describes The Boy using religious symbols and language. At one point, The Man describes his blond head as a "[g]olden chalice, good house to a god" (117.1). The Boy sometimes seems like a divine child who can inspire The Man to goodness. We're not sure how literally McCarthy means his readers to take these hints about The Boy's divinity. We can tell you, however, that The Boy's gentle nature provides us readers with hope for the future. Though he has only known this savage, post-apocalyptic world, he's still full of kindness and innocence.
Hester Prynne A young woman sent to the colonies by her husband, who plans to join her later but is presumed lost at sea. She is a symbol of the acknowledged sinner; one whose transgression has been identified and who makes appropriate, socio-religious atonement.
Hester is our homegirl. She's a self-sufficient single mother in one of the gloomiest most austere moments in America's history; she finds a way to support her daughter in a time when women were just supposed to support their husbands; she uses her innate strength to transform the meaning of her punishment; and she actually questions the insane, hypocritical morals of her community. Yep, she pretty much rocks our world. So let's take a closer look at how this decided not well-behaved woman went from a young, neglected wife to a pillar of her community.
Hester is the book’s protagonist and the wearer of the scarlet letter that gives the book its title. The letter, a patch of fabric in the shape of an “A,” signifies that Hester is an “adulterer.” As a young woman, Hester married an elderly scholar, Chillingworth, who sent her ahead to America to live but never followed her. While waiting for him, she had an affair with a Puritan minister named Dimmesdale, after which she gave birth to Pearl. Hester is passionate but also strong—she endures years of shame and scorn. She equals both her husband and her lover in her intelligence and thoughtfulness. Her alienation puts her in the position to make acute observations about her community, particularly about its treatment of women.
Pearl Pearl is the illegitimate daughter of Hester Prynne and Arthur Dimmesdale. She is the living manifestation of Hester's sin and a symbol of the product of the act of adultery and of an act of passion and love.
Quick: you're the most sinful woman in probably the entire New World, not counting those heathen Indians, you've just given birth to a girl, you feel really bad about your adultery, and you want to convince the town leaders that you should be allowed to keep the child. What do you name her? (A) Humiliation(B) Sin-Deny(C) Sorry-for-Sin(D) Abstinence (E) Pearl Yep. Hester names her daughter "Pearl," as in pure, white, and definitely not sinful. (Oh, and A through D? Totally Puritan names.) But that's not what "pearl" means to Hester. To Hester, it means the pearl of great price, the pearl in Jesus' parable that is bought at "great price." If you're thinking by now that Pearl is much more of a symbol than an actual character—well, you're right. But let's see what we can make of her.
Hester’s illegitimate daughter Pearl is a young girl with a moody, mischievous spirit and an ability to perceive things that others do not. For example, she quickly discerns the truth about her mother and Dimmesdale. The townspeople say that she barely seems human and spread rumors that her unknown father is actually the Devil. She is wise far beyond her years, frequently engaging in ironic play having to do with her mother’s scarlet letter.
If Aspen is America's personal Han Solo-esque dreamboat, then what is Maxon? Her noble Luke Skywalker? Her classy Lando Calrissian? Her—gasp—Jar Jar? Okay, we know—we can't necessarily frame every issue in Star Wars terms. Regardless, you can learn a lot about Maxon by comparing him to America's other love, Aspen, as well as America's own preconceived notions of Illéa's crown prince.
Lt. Jimmy Cross The leader of Alpha Company, Cross personifies mental escapism, the ability to project one's mind somewhere else to escape from an undesirable situation. Instead of concentrating on the war, Cross occupies his mind with memories of Martha, his old sweetheart. Rather than helping to search for Kiowa's body, Cross spends time thinking about the letter he must write to Kiowa's father. Cross meets up with O'Brien after the war, and he still carries feelings of unrequited love for Martha. Whether in the middle of the war or 20 years later, Cross focuses on life outside of war, but also carries a heavy, self-imposed burden of guilt because of it.
You can't help but feel a little sorry for Jimmy Cross. He's the leader of the platoon, but he's the opposite of the tough, Schwarzenegger or Sam Worthington-type you'd expect of an officer in Vietnam. First of all, the guy daydreams all the time—sometimes about his love for Martha, a girl who'll never love him back, and sometimes about golf and its clear rules and expectations. Inevitably, though, during his daydreams, one of his men will get killed, and he'll blame himself for not being vigilant enough: He had loved Martha more than his men, and as a consequence Lavender was now dead, and this was something he would have to carry like a stone in his stomach for the rest of the war. (The Things They Carried.42) He signed up to be an officer on a whim, because his friends did. He's not comfortable being responsible for his men's lives, but instead of ignoring the responsibility, he confronts it head on… before he slips into another daydream, that is.
The lieutenant of the Alpha Company, who is responsible for the entire group of men. Cross is well intentioned but unsure of how to lead his men. He is wracked with guilt because he believes that his preoccupation with his unrequited love for a girl named Martha and his tendency to follow orders despite his better judgment caused the deaths of Ted Lavender and Kiowa, two members of Alpha Company.
D'Artagnan The main character of the novel, d'Artagnan was raised in the French province of Gascony, an area known for its courageous and brave men. The novel begins with his departure from home and his arrival in Paris, taking with him virtually nothing but his good looks, his honesty and integrity, his loyalty to both the king and the cardinal, and his expert swordsmanship. Despite initial blunders and difficulties, d'Artagnan quickly makes friends with the three musketeers, and later he finds himself in a position to do a great service for the queen of France. D'Artagnan's name has become synonymous with a fearless adventurer and a swashbuckling swordsman. At the end of the novel, d'Artagnan's dream of becoming a member of the King's Musketeers is fulfilled, and he is given a commission in the company.
Weena is one lucky Eloi – she gets burned to death rather than eaten. The Time Traveller is relieved when he thinks the forest fire got her before the Morlocks (9.16) – and he's her friend! Weena seems to keep getting into these dangerous situations, which the Time Traveller tries to rescue her. If that were all she was good for, she wouldn't be a very interesting character – she'd just be a prop to show off the Time Traveller's heroism (or his lack thereof). Weena is like the other Eloi in many respects. She's not very smart. She's easily tired. She's amused by matches and frightened of the dark. She's graceful and childish. But at the same time, Weena has her own personality. She has retained certain feelings that the other Eloi seem to have lost – gratitude, for instance. After the Time Traveller saves her from drowning, Weena keeps him company and tries to keep him safe and comfortable – in her own way. This mostly involves trying to prevent him from going underground and putting flowers in his pockets – which is what she thinks they're there for. (Weena reminds us a little bit of several cats we've known, who have thought that our shoes were made to hold mice.) So Weena is set apart from the Eloi by her gratitude and affection for the Time Traveller. He certainly feels something for her, because around the time he realizes that the Morlocks eat the Eloi, he decides to bring her back to London (7.16). When the Time Traveller asks Weena about the Morlocks, she gets very upset and starts to cry: They were the only tears, except my own, I ever saw in that Golden Age. When I saw them I ceased abruptly to trouble about the Morlocks, and was only concerned in banishing these signs of the human inheritance from Weena's eyes. And very soon she was smiling and clapping her hands, while I solemnly burned a match. (5.41) Notice how in that one passage Weena is marked out as different from and similar to the other Eloi. On the one hand, only she cries, just like the Time Traveller. But notice the difference that opens up between Weena and the Time Traveller in the last line: while he's solemn, she's childishly amused by fire. (Her relation to fire is a little strange – she's amused by matches, wants to play with the bonfire [9.4], and possibly gets killed by a forest fire. It's like a PSA for fire safety.) By seeming both human and not, Weena is a reminder that some things change, but others don't. That's at least how the unnamed narrator chooses to think about her in the Epilogue. Lastly, we have to deal with the romantic angle here. The Time Traveller and Weena give each other flowers and kisses, and all the movie versions of the novel decide to make this into a love story. Is it? Since the word that the Time Traveller applies to Weena most often (in some form) is "child," it seems like the relationship here is less romantic than affectionate or paternal. (Which doesn't prevent us from considering some sort of Time Machine / Lolita mash-up.) Check out the "Steaminess" page for more on this issue.
Okonkwo (Oh-kawn-kwoh) The central character of Things Fall Apart. A young leader of the African Igbo community of Umuofia (Oo-moo-oh-fee-ah), he is known as a fierce warrior as well as a successful farmer. He is determined to overcome the stigma left by his father's laziness and wastefulness. kawn Things Fall Apart. oh
Okonkwo is a self-made, well-respected member of the Umuofia clan. Though outwardly stern and powerful, much of his life is dictated by internal fear. His greatest, overwhelming worry is that he will become like his father – lazy, unable to support his family, and cowardly. Okonkwo considers many of his father’s characteristics to be feminine. Much of Okonkwo’s behavior results from a reactionary desire to be completely unlike his father. This means that Okonkwo attempts to work hard, provide for his family materially, be brave, and be masculine in every possible way. As a result, Okonkwo’s becomes successful in many ways – he becomes very wealthy, holds a high-ranked position in the community, has three wives, and is known for his skill as a wrestler and warrior. But he also tends toward emotions that are extreme, and his fear motivates him to take actions which are often unnecessary and ultimately destructive. His fear of being feminine leads him to assist in the murder of Ikemefuna whom he loved, to beat his wives, be emotionally distant from his children, and to disown his oldest son.As an uncompromising man’s man, Okonkwo’s relationship towards his family is one of complete dictatorship. His three wives are there to serve him his food and raise his children. By seeing them as his subjects, Okonkwo can justify his brutal behavior against them. He can beat his wives without guilt. He can threaten Ekwefi with a gun when she talks back. He can rebuke Nwoye for listening to old wives’ tales. This sense of ownership is exemplified when Okonkwo takes Ikemefuna’s life. Though he does have qualms about killing Ikemefuna, they are not qualms about whether or not he has the right to do it. Okonkwo feels complete ownership over his family.There is, however, the problem of love and intimacy. Okonkwo rarely shows these aspects of himself since he considers emotion soft and feminine – but the emotions are there nonetheless. The fact that he lies to Ikemefuna to protect the boy from fear and later feels guilty about killing him are proof of that Okonkwo isn’t devoid of positive human emotions. But, whenever there is a clash between showing true emotion and maintaining the show of his strength, Okonkwo will always go with the latter.This doesn't mean that Okonkwo never admits he is wrong; more than anything, Okonkwo tries to follow the laws of the clan. Whenever he breaks them – either deliberately through a loss of temper or inadvertently as in shooting the boy – he never questions the punishments brought upon him. Okonkwo abides by his punishment whether or not he thinks they are fair. This is one way of maintaining his honor and reputation. He reads the laws literally, unlike his father who bent the rules and tried to circumvent certain aspects of the law.Thus we come to one of the central conflicts in the novel: the divide between Okonkwo’s personal pride and the actions forced on him by the external social laws of the Umuofia. His final act of suicide is the ultimate demonstration of things falling apart because it is the first and only time that Okonkwo purposefully and calculatedly breaks the clan laws. As a character, Okonkwo remains pretty consistent throughout the book. We see no sudden changes in behavior or mindset; in fact, that may be Okonkwo’s problem – his inability to adapt or compromise his ethics to changing situations that call for more tolerance or compassion. Okonkwo, whose sense of pride and dignity continues until the end, chooses to live and die on his own terms rather than submit to the white man. For Okonkwo, giving in would be against so much of what he has stood for – courage, tradition, and manliness.
An influential clan leader in Umuofia. Since early childhood, Okonkwo’s embarrassment about his lazy, squandering, and effeminate father, Unoka, has driven him to succeed. Okonkwo’s hard work and prowess in war have earned him a position of high status in his clan, and he attains wealth sufficient to support three wives and their children. Okonkwo’s tragic flaw is that he is terrified of looking weak like his father. As a result, he behaves rashly, bringing a great deal of trouble and sorrow upon himself and his family.
Jim Hawkins Twelve- or thirteen-year-old boy, an innkeeper's son. Jim is the novel's protagonist and chief narrator.
Treasure Island is supposed to be a novel for boys. This is coming out of stodgy, Victorian England, so girls aren't supposed to want to sail away and hunt for treasure. But some of us here at Shmoop are both girls and want to go on treasure hunts, so we still love this book. Robert Louis Stevenson gives us a main character with whom his desired audience of ordinary boys can identify: a smart lad without too much money or education who comes out all right in the end. Sure Jim Hawkins is a little more imaginative and adventurous than many, but he is still average enough to be relatable. Jim is the only child of English innkeepers in an unspecified decade of the 18th century. He stumbles into his pirate adventure by chance when Billy Bones ("the captain") happens to blunder into Jim's parents' inn. Jim's mother is the one who insists on opening the dead Billy Bones's chest, where Jim chances on a packet of papers containing the treasure map. Later, luck will have it that Jim falls asleep in just the right place to overhear Long John Silver's plans to rise up against the captain of the ship. What's more, Jim slips into the forest at just the right time to bump into Ben Gunn, the marooned former pirate and possessor of Flint's treasure. Even Jim's one real act of violence is an accident: he's holding two loaded pistols in the direction of murderous pirate Israel Hands when Hands' knife grazes his arm and he squeezes the triggers. Basically, Jim's real gift is his good luck. He's no hero; he's just always in the right place at the right time. It's Jim's luck that makes him so easy to identify with. He doesn't have any great skills or spectacular bravery – it's kind of the opposite, actually, since he's no help at all in any of the pirate battles on the island and he only manages to dodge evil Job Anderson's sword blows by tripping and falling at just the right time. Still, we like to imagine that, if we found a treasure map and fell in with a bunch of pirates, we would muddle through OK like Jim does. Part of what makes him so likable is that he comes out OK without there being anything special about him. After all, most of us aren't really that special either when it comes down to it (at least, not in a pirate-defeating kind of way), but we still dream of treasure and adventure. So Jim's our kind of hero: ordinary, practical, adaptable, and above all, lucky. Occasionally people describe Treasure Island as a coming-of-age novel. We can totally see why, because it involves a boy going on an adventure. He has to make some kind of personal transition over the course of fighting pirates and finding treasure, right? And we certainly agree that Jim's journey from his parents' small country inn to Treasure Island and back leaves him with the kind of experience most of us can only dream of. Even so, we're not totally convinced that Jim's experiences have brought him to adulthood. You can change and still remain a kid – otherwise, childhood would be completely boring and static. Jim's a teenager, so of course he is learning new things. But that doesn't mean that he's reached some well-defined new stage of his life, which is what "coming of age" seems to imply. After all, Jim doesn't exactly spend a lot of time reflecting on the lessons he has learned from his time on Treasure Island. (And how applicable is fighting pirates to his everyday life back in England?) What's more, the novel closes on the open-ended note that Jim still has nightmares about his time on the island (and the sound of Long John Silver's parrot, Captain Flint). He has not moved on or gained closure or however you might put it – the island is still a place of fear that haunts his dreams. We don't know anything about Jim's future; all we know about his later life is that he has written down his adventures at the order of Squire Trelawney and Doctor Livesey. So it seems problematic to say that Jim began the book as a boy and has now become a man. Stevenson doesn't seem that interested in such an easy A to B story of personal development. That said, this is a book about a teenager taking initiative and saving a bunch of adults from pirates, which is a pretty mature thing to do. So if you want to read Treasure Island as a story of Jim Hawkins's coming of age, that's totally fair. Certainly the issue of Jim's development as a character is complicated enough to allow more than one reading of the story. So Jim is our trusty narrator (well, except in the three chapters that get taken over by Doctor Livesey). But he's not narrating Treasure Island while it happens – he's looking back on the events of the island from some point in the future. This shows us a couple of things: first, we know that Jim, our main character, survives, so the book can't get too stressful. Second, Jim is more than just our main character. Everything in the book gets filtered through his perceptions and observations, so Jim's character subtly influences pretty much the whole book. Robert Louis Stevenson is using a pretty common storytelling strategy for the 19th century. This whole Future Main Character narrating the adventures of Past Main Character features in tons of novels from the period, including Jane Eyre , David Copperfield , and Stevenson's own later adventure novel Kidnapped (all available through Shmoop guides near you!). But Jim gives us a bit of a twist. When David Copperfield, say, analyzes his own past life, he discusses the lessons and emotional consequences of what happened to him. It's not that Jim is unfeeling or anything, but he's not melodramatic. He keeps his emotional commentary to a minimum. Jim starts out the book saying that he's jotting all of this down because "Squire Trelawney, Doctor Livesey, and the rest of these gentlemen" (1.1.) have asked him to. Most of Jim's comments from the perspective of his adult wisdom and experience seem to be more about building up suspense than giving us profound insights into Jim as a human being. Take, for example, when Jim writes: Sometimes the isle was thick with savages, with whom we fought; sometimes full of dangerous animals that hunted us; but in all my fancies nothing occurred to me so strange and tragic as our actual adventures. (7.1) What Future Jim, is saying is that, as Past Jim looked at his treasure map, he imagined any number of things about the island and what awaited him there. But nothing that Past Jim pictured in his mind was as weird and terrible as what actually happened. This passage shows us that 1) something "strange and terrible" is about to happen, and 2) it's going to be beyond our ability to guess what it is. Future Jim is telling us that, if we keep reading the book, we're going to be both excited and surprised. So we do get some insight into Past Jim's feelings. We know he's excited and terrified by what the island might hold. But these feelings seem to tell us less about Jim than about the plot of the story and how much fun is in store if we keep reading. Jim's narrative voice builds up our suspense without dwelling too much on Jim's psychology. For more on Future Jim, see our analysis of "Narrator Point of View."
The first-person narrator of almost the entire novel. Jim is the son of an innkeeper near Bristol, England, and is probably in his early teens. He is eager and enthusiastic to go to sea and hunt for treasure. He is a modest narrator, never boasting of the remarkable courage and heroism he consistently displays. Jim is often impulsive and impetuous, but he exhibits increasing sensitivity and wisdom.
Rooster is a deputy marshal for the U.S. District Court for the Western District of Arkansas. May not sound like much of a job description, but consider this: through most of the nineteenth century, western lands were Indian Territory and not under regular U.S. law. The only people with jurisdiction in tens of thousands of square miles were U.S. Marshals—and there weren't too many of those. Fugitives from U.S. states would flee to the Territory, where U.S. police couldn't legally arrest them and where they'd have a good chance of hiding out from any lawmen. (Want to know more about all this? Check out the U.S. Marshal Museum website.) So, if you're a marshal, your job is basically to try to keep order in one of the most lawless regions the U.S. has ever known—and you're pitting yourself against desperate, violent criminals. It was a dangerous job. As rather dramatic Colonel Stonehill tells Mattie: The marshal travels about friendless and alone in that criminal nation. Every man's hand is against him there save in large part for that of the Indian who has been cruelly imposed on by those felonious intruders from the states. (3.20) No wonder Rooster comes off so mean.
Edward Cullen is our protagonist vampire and deep love interest of Bella. Though Bella repeatedly describes Edward as angelic, Edward is the first to acknowledge that he has a dark side. When he and Bella are first getting to know each other, he warns her, "What if I'm not a superhero? What if I'm the bad guy?" (5.19) Bella insists that he's "dangerous […] but not bad" (5.112, 114), but Edward says simply, "You're wrong" (5.115). Much of the tension in the novel results from Edward's very nature as a predator, a vampire. He's a conflicted character because he sees himself as a monster – he hates that he craves human blood, especially Bella's. He's horrified by his natural instincts. When telling Bella about his past, he admits that he did, at one point in his life, give in and prey on humans. Edward returned to Carlisle and committed to the "vegetarian" diet after he "began to see the monster in [his] eyes" (16.82). Yet when Edward encountered Bella for the first time in Biology class, he almost lost control for the first time in decades:"To me, it was like you were some kind of demon, summoned straight from my own personal hell to ruin me. The fragrance coming off your skin…I thought it would make me deranged that first day. In that one hour, I thought of a hundred different ways to lure you from the room, to get you alone. And I fought them each back, thinking of my family, what I could do to them. I had to run out, to get away before I could speak the words that would make you follow…" (13.102)Despite his primal urges, Edward tells Bella, "I couldn't live with myself if I ever hurt you. You don't know how it's tortured me" (13.124). Though he loves Bella, Edward struggles against his nature, and continues to worry that he won't be able to control himself and will accidentally hurt her. All the same, Bella can't resist him. Edward repeatedly tells her that he's dangerous, but Bella insists, "I would rather die than stay away from you" (13.126). Why is that?
Heathcliff The main character. Orphaned as a child, he is constantly on the outside, constantly losing people. Although he and Catherine Earnshaw profess that they complete each other, her decision to marry Edgar Linton almost destroys their relationship. He spends most of his life contemplating and acting out revenge. He is abusive, brutal, and cruel.
An orphan brought to live at Wuthering Heights by Mr. Earnshaw, Heathcliff falls into an intense, unbreakable love with Mr. Earnshaw’s daughter Catherine. After Mr. Earnshaw dies, his resentful son Hindley abuses Heathcliff and treats him as a servant. Because of her desire for social prominence, Catherine marries Edgar Linton instead of Heathcliff. Heathcliff’s humiliation and misery prompt him to spend most of the rest of his life seeking revenge on Hindley, his beloved Catherine, and their respective children (Hareton and young Catherine). A powerful, fierce, and often cruel man, Heathcliff acquires a fortune and uses his extraordinary powers of will to acquire both Wuthering Heights and Thrushcross Grange, the estate of Edgar Linton.
Heathcliff’s son by Isabella. Weak, sniveling, demanding, and constantly ill, Linton is raised in London by his mother and does not meet his father until he is thirteen years old, when he goes to live with him after his mother’s death. Heathcliff despises Linton, treats him contemptuously, and, by forcing him to marry the young Catherine, uses him to cement his control over Thrushcross Grange after Edgar Linton’s death. Linton himself dies not long after this marriage.
A miserable, bitter old miser, Scrooge hates irrational things like happiness, generosity, and Christmas, until a trio of Ghosts shows him the error of his ways. Really, what's the deal with Scrooge? It's probably safe to say that there were exactly zero people like him in Dickens's reading public (nobody's that mean, right?), so he's certainly not here to make us identify with his awfulness. So what function does this character play? Well, here are two good ways to think about him.
A miserable, bitter old miser, Scrooge hates irrational things like happiness, generosity, and Christmas, until a trio of Ghosts shows him the error of his ways. Really, what's the deal with Scrooge? It's probably safe to say that there were exactly zero people like him in Dickens's reading public (nobody's that mean, right?), so he's certainly not here to make us identify with his awfulness. So what function does this character play? Well, here are two good ways to think about him.
A miserable, bitter old miser, Scrooge hates irrational things like happiness, generosity, and Christmas, until a trio of Ghosts shows him the error of his ways. Really, what's the deal with Scrooge? It's probably safe to say that there were exactly zero people like him in Dickens's reading public (nobody's that mean, right?), so he's certainly not here to make us identify with his awfulness. So what function does this character play? Well, here are two good ways to think about him.
Besides being a professional swindler, counterfeiter, and general law-breaker, Compeyson is the man who jilted Miss Havisham at the altar all of those many years ago. He was in cahoots with Arthur Havisham all along, and eventually he linked up with Magwitch. When Magwitch and Compeyson were caught forging signatures, Compeyson got off easily with only half the jail sentence that Magwitch received. Why? Because of his "curly hair and his black clothes and his white pocket-handkercher" (42.32). The court appreciated Compeyson's gentlemanly ways, and, thus, went easier on him. Compeyson and Magwitch hate each other and are forever fighting. Eventually Compeyson drowns after fighting Magwitch in the Thames. Did Magwitch kill him? He's not saying.
A criminal and the former partner of Magwitch, Compeyson is an educated, gentlemanly outlaw who contrasts sharply with the coarse and uneducated Magwitch. Compeyson is responsible for Magwitch’s capture at the end of the novel. He is also the man who jilted Miss Havisham on her wedding day.
Noah’s another typical minor Dickens character, in that he’s grotesque, absurd, and exaggerated. He’s skinny, lean, and eel-like, and has a taste for oysters and sneaking. Honestly, he kind of reminds us of Gollum.But Lord of the Rings comparisons aside, Noah’s a pretty fun character. He starts out the novel as an apprentice in Mr. Sowerberry’s shop. He was a charity boy, and the other kids made fun of him. So as soon as Oliver arrives, Noah is pretty jazzed about having someone even lower on the social ladder than he is. Finally, someone he can dump on! Dickens takes this circumstance to moralize about how everyone likes to stomp on the people below them:This affords charming food for contemplation. It shows us what a beautiful thing human nature is, and how impartially the same amiable qualities are developed in the finest lord and the dirtiest charity-boy. (5.26)Noah’s obviously a source of comic relief and, like the Artful Dodger, the comedy comes partly from contrast: Noah’s absurdly scrawny, and Charlotte is burly and tough; but Noah bosses her around, and she submits like a lamb. Noah’s awfully fond of power, but too cowardly to do anything but sneak around, spy on people, and rat them out if he thinks it’ll be good for him.
Okonkwo (Oh-kawn-kwoh) The central character of Things Fall Apart. A young leader of the African Igbo community of Umuofia (Oo-moo-oh-fee-ah), he is known as a fierce warrior as well as a successful farmer. He is determined to overcome the stigma left by his father's laziness and wastefulness. kawn Things Fall Apart. oh
Okonkwo is a self-made, well-respected member of the Umuofia clan. Though outwardly stern and powerful, much of his life is dictated by internal fear. His greatest, overwhelming worry is that he will become like his father – lazy, unable to support his family, and cowardly. Okonkwo considers many of his father’s characteristics to be feminine. Much of Okonkwo’s behavior results from a reactionary desire to be completely unlike his father. This means that Okonkwo attempts to work hard, provide for his family materially, be brave, and be masculine in every possible way. As a result, Okonkwo’s becomes successful in many ways – he becomes very wealthy, holds a high-ranked position in the community, has three wives, and is known for his skill as a wrestler and warrior. But he also tends toward emotions that are extreme, and his fear motivates him to take actions which are often unnecessary and ultimately destructive. His fear of being feminine leads him to assist in the murder of Ikemefuna whom he loved, to beat his wives, be emotionally distant from his children, and to disown his oldest son.As an uncompromising man’s man, Okonkwo’s relationship towards his family is one of complete dictatorship. His three wives are there to serve him his food and raise his children. By seeing them as his subjects, Okonkwo can justify his brutal behavior against them. He can beat his wives without guilt. He can threaten Ekwefi with a gun when she talks back. He can rebuke Nwoye for listening to old wives’ tales. This sense of ownership is exemplified when Okonkwo takes Ikemefuna’s life. Though he does have qualms about killing Ikemefuna, they are not qualms about whether or not he has the right to do it. Okonkwo feels complete ownership over his family.There is, however, the problem of love and intimacy. Okonkwo rarely shows these aspects of himself since he considers emotion soft and feminine – but the emotions are there nonetheless. The fact that he lies to Ikemefuna to protect the boy from fear and later feels guilty about killing him are proof of that Okonkwo isn’t devoid of positive human emotions. But, whenever there is a clash between showing true emotion and maintaining the show of his strength, Okonkwo will always go with the latter.This doesn't mean that Okonkwo never admits he is wrong; more than anything, Okonkwo tries to follow the laws of the clan. Whenever he breaks them – either deliberately through a loss of temper or inadvertently as in shooting the boy – he never questions the punishments brought upon him. Okonkwo abides by his punishment whether or not he thinks they are fair. This is one way of maintaining his honor and reputation. He reads the laws literally, unlike his father who bent the rules and tried to circumvent certain aspects of the law.Thus we come to one of the central conflicts in the novel: the divide between Okonkwo’s personal pride and the actions forced on him by the external social laws of the Umuofia. His final act of suicide is the ultimate demonstration of things falling apart because it is the first and only time that Okonkwo purposefully and calculatedly breaks the clan laws. As a character, Okonkwo remains pretty consistent throughout the book. We see no sudden changes in behavior or mindset; in fact, that may be Okonkwo’s problem – his inability to adapt or compromise his ethics to changing situations that call for more tolerance or compassion. Okonkwo, whose sense of pride and dignity continues until the end, chooses to live and die on his own terms rather than submit to the white man. For Okonkwo, giving in would be against so much of what he has stood for – courage, tradition, and manliness.
An influential clan leader in Umuofia. Since early childhood, Okonkwo’s embarrassment about his lazy, squandering, and effeminate father, Unoka, has driven him to succeed. Okonkwo’s hard work and prowess in war have earned him a position of high status in his clan, and he attains wealth sufficient to support three wives and their children. Okonkwo’s tragic flaw is that he is terrified of looking weak like his father. As a result, he behaves rashly, bringing a great deal of trouble and sorrow upon himself and his family.
Dorian Gray is so many opposites at once that we can't really try to understand them all. He's good, he's bad; he's beautiful, he's hideous; he's perfect, he's terribly flawed. Most importantly, he's literally two things at once—he's himself, a living, breathing human being, and he's also the portrait, a visible reflection of the state of his (crumbling) soul.
A radiantly handsome, impressionable, and wealthy young gentleman, whose portrait the artist Basil Hallward paints. Under the influence of Lord Henry Wotton, Dorian becomes extremely concerned with the transience of his beauty and begins to pursue his own pleasure above all else. He devotes himself to having as many experiences as possible, whether moral or immoral, elegant or sordid.
Dorian Gray Called "Prince Charming" by Sibyl Vane, he is the main character of the novel. The book revolves around a secret pact that Dorian makes and the subsequent destruction of his soul.
Charles is the son of the richest family in Green Lake at the same time that Kate Barlow is the school teacher. He is spoiled and stupid and gets upset when things are denied to him. When Kate Barlow refuses to go out with him he becomes very angry. It is Charles who leads the citizens of Green Lake to burn down the schoolhouse and kill Sam after he kisses Kate. Charles also has a very bad foot odor caused by a fungus. For this reason people call him Trout, because his feet smell like dead fish.
Regan Lear's second daughter. Regan joins forces with Goneril to destroy their father. Regan initially appears less harsh than her elder sister, but in the end, she proves to be as blood-thirsty as Goneril.
Lear’s middle daughter and the wife of the duke of Cornwall. Regan is as ruthless as Goneril and as aggressive in all the same ways. In fact, it is difficult to think of any quality that distinguishes her from her sister. When they are not egging each other on to further acts of cruelty, they jealously compete for the same man, Edmund.
Regan is the younger (and potentially less wicked) of Lear's two evil daughters. Slightly more passive, Regan can't oppose her father on her own—she waits for Goneril to show up and support her. She's more likely to get men to do her dirty work for her than to attend to it herself (check out the torture scene, in which she eagerly begs Cornwall to pluck out Gloucester's other eye.)As we have already been reminded that evil trumps good in this play, we are told in addition that really evil (Goneril) trumps mostly evil (Regan) when the former poisons the latter. This reinforces the self-centeredness-is-thicker-than-blood theme. Goneril and Regan weren't sticking together for sisterly values; they were doing it to beat Lear. Once Lear was bested, they turn on each other.
Poor George. He really gets the short end of the stick in this one. And, seeing as he's one of the few characters without staggering flaws, he doesn't even deserve it. From what we can tell, Wilson is hard-working and not cheating on his spouse. He's in a marriage with a woman who doesn't love or respect him, who walks through him as though he's a ghost; and meanwhile he just does what she says: "'Oh, sure,' agreed Wilson hurriedly" (2.15)—and we think not for the first time. After Myrtle's death, Wilson is in serious emotional pain. He cries out "Oh, my God" over and over—but because his wife is dead? Because he just found out she was having an affair? Or because he feels guilty for making her run out into the street? The other thing to note about Wilson is that he's the only character who talks about God. He tells Myrtle that she "can't fool God," that "God sees everything" (8.105). His comment reminds us that, unlike the rich careless classes, the lower classes can't just retreat "back into […] money" (9.136). Wilson and his class actually have to take responsibility for their actions, and they don't have trips to Paris to make it all more palatable. No wonder Wilson decides that he doesn't want to live with the consequences.
You wouldn't to get in a fistfight with Fernand Mondego. He's a big dude, and a passionate one. As a young man he longs for Mercédès; his passion for her is so great that he vows to kill Edmond rather than give her up. That said, he's pretty much all talk. He can't bring himself to kill Edmond, not after Mercédès threatens to kill herself if he does, and so he does the next best thing: he whines and he nags and he nags and he whines. Really, Fernand is a whiner and a mope above all else. He doesn't even relish the opportunity to put his rival away. What kind of villain doesn't enjoy sticking it to his nemesis?Even after Edmond is gone, he doesn't change his tactics. He just waits and mopes and hopes Mercédès will consent to some sort of pity marriage. Only his conscription into the army breaks his cycle of whining and depression and, well, the next time we seem him – as the Count de Morcerf – it's a whole 'nother story.
Dantès’s rival for Mercédès’s affections. Mondego helps in framing Dantès for treason and then marries Mercédès himself when Dantès is imprisoned. Through acts of treachery Mondego becomes a wealthy and powerful man and takes on the name of the Count de Morcerf. He is the first victim of Dantès’s vengeance.
The pig who spreads Napoleon’s propaganda among the other animals. Squealer justifies the pigs’ monopolization of resources and spreads false statistics pointing to the farm’s success. Orwell uses Squealer to explore the ways in which those in power often use rhetoric and language to twist the truth and gain and maintain social and political control.
We don't know a lot about Meyer Wolfsheim – and we're not supposed to. Beyond the fact that he's a business associate and a friend of Gatsby's, all we know is that he's an inhabitant of New York's seedy underworld and a dead ringer for real-life Arnold Rothstein: the man who really did fix the 1919 World Series—one of Meyer Wolfsheim's impressive accomplishments (4.118-118). Although Wolfsheim remains a mystery, we end up learning quite a lot about other characters through him. First of all, his business "goneggtions" with Gatsby shine a rather dubious light upon the latter's dealings. Even though Gatsby wants everyone to believe that he's the real deal, we begin to wonder how he really earned that fortune. Wolfsheim also reveals some rather unfortunate things about one of our other main characters, Nick, like that he's innately judgmental. Nick is clearly intrigued by the guy, but he also acts like he's got a bad taste in his mouth around him. This shows us the bias against the foreign "Other" (Wolfsheim is Jewish) prevalent in so-called "respectable" society of the time—the same kind of bias that makes Tom declare that the "Nordic race" is being submerged, and the same kind of bias that led just two decades later to the Holocaust.
Spitz The dog that kills Curly; not unexpectedly, Spitz becomes Buck's most bitter enemy. Later, Spitz is killed by Buck in a dog fight which is central to the novel. Buck's victory entitles him to take over the commanding power position that once belonged to Spitz. Buck's fight-to-the-death with Spitz illustrates Buck's ability to survive among even the most primitive elements.
Buck’s archrival and the original leader of Francois’s dog team. Spitz is a fierce animal—a “devil-dog,” one man calls him—who is used to fighting with other dogs and winning. He meets his match in Buck, however, who is as strong as Spitz and possesses more cunning. Spitz is an amoral being who fights for survival with all of his might, disregarding what is right and wrong.
Gottfried is Harriet and Martin's father and one of the story's chief villains, though he dies almost forty years before the novel begins. As Blomkvist and Salander discover, he murdered women from at least 1949 until his death in 1965. Blomkvist and Salander also learn that Gottfried raped both of his children and that he initiated Martin into the rape/kidnap/murder cycle. What Blomkvist never suspects is that Harriet killed Gottfried. Harriet confesses this to Blomkvist when he finds her in Australia.Salander sees Gottfried as a man who hates women and who chose to murder and rape. Blomkvist feels that Gottfried was driven insane by his Nazi father, Richard Vanger, who beat him and messed with his head. What do you think?
The computer-system analyst at Jurassic Park, Dennis Nedry fills the role of disgruntled employee. He's described as overweight and as a slob, and that kind of sums up a lot about him. Now, what actually happens is this: Nedry is annoyed at the blame he's received for the bugs in the park's computer system. His frustration is somewhat warranted: he was kept in the dark about the purpose of the system and had to put it together without all the information he needed. John Hammond's overconfidence strikes again: not only could Nedry not make the system perfect, he also turns against his employer and tries to help out the competition. Yeah, Nedry basically chooses to smuggle dinosaur embryos out of the park and sell them to a competitor. He pays the price, though: he's killed in the act—and pretty gruesomely at that.
Jurassic Park's computer technician. Nedry is hired by the Biosyn Corporation to steal fifteen of the park's dinosaur embryos. The Biosyn Corporation is perhaps the novel's major antagonist, embodying the evil, negligent possibilities of bioengineering. Nedry is smart, fat, and surly, and, in his dealings with Biosyn, represents the novel's lone antagonist human character. His computer hacking is responsible for all the problems that send Jurassic Park into turmoil.
The great dragon who lives in the Lonely Mountain. Years ago, Smaug heard of the treasure that the dwarves had amassed in the mountain under Thror’s reign, and he drove them away to claim the gold for himself. His flaming breath can scorch a city, his huge wings can carry him great distances, and his armorlike hide is almost impenetrable. Smaug can speak and possesses a dark, sardonic sense of humor.
Egeus Hermia's tyrannical father. He capriciously declares that she must marry Demetrius or be put to death for disobedience; according to the law of Athens, daughters must obey their fathers or forfeit their lives. At the end of the play, he is shocked to learn that Lysander and Hermia tried to flee Athens and insists they should be punished. Theseus overrules him, making the lovers marry instead.
One of the prison wardens. Norton institutes the new “Inside-Out” program that forces prisoners to work on chain gains to repair roads and public buildings. Even though he claims to be a devout Baptist, he accepts bribes from local construction companies so that the Inside-Out program won’t put them out of business. He uses Andy’s financial expertise to hide his illegal earnings and therefore refuses to help Andy win a retrial. Norton eventually resigns in disgrace after Andy’s escape.
Scarlett’s third husband, and a dashing, dangerous adventurer and scoundrel. Expelled from West Point and disowned by his prominent Charleston family, Rhett becomes an opportunistic blockade-runner during the war, emerging as one of the only rich Southern men in Atlanta after the war. Rhett proves himself a loving father and, at times, a caring husband. Though he loves Scarlett, his pride prevents him from showing her his love, and it even leads him to brutality. Candid, humorous, and contemptuous of silly social codes, Rhett exposes hypocrisy wherever he goes. He represents postwar society, a pragmatic, fast-paced world in which the strong thrive and the weak perish.
A lazy, drunk, and greedy man. Caderousse is present when the plot to frame Dantès is hatched, but he does not take an active part in the crime. Unlike Danglars and Mondego, Caderousse never finds his fortune, instead making his living through petty crime and the occasional murder.
Tybalt Lady Capulet's nephew and Juliet's cousin. Tybalt is violent and hot-tempered, with a strong sense of honor. He challenges Romeo to a duel in response to Romeo's attending a Capulet party. His challenge to Romeo is taken up by Mercutio, whom Tybalt kills. Romeo then kills Tybalt.
A Capulet, Juliet’s cousin on her mother’s side. Vain, fashionable, supremely aware of courtesy and the lack of it, he becomes aggressive, violent, and quick to draw his sword when he feels his pride has been injured. Once drawn, his sword is something to be feared. He loathes Montagues.
A prison guard. A tall man with thinning red hair, Hadley speaks loudly and uses the threat of violence to control the prisoners. Pessimistic, cynical, and paranoid, he feels the world is out to get him, even when he inherits $35,000 from a long-lost brother. Andy’s offer to help Hadley avoid paying taxes on the money marks the beginning of Andy’s career as the prison’s financial wizard. Hadley eventually has a heart attack and retires.
Caliban The offspring of the witch Sycorax and the devil. Prospero has made Caliban his servant or slave, and in response, Caliban plots to murder Prospero.
"Hag-born" "Whelp." "Demi-devil." "Poor credulous monster." "Hag-seed." "Strange fish." These are just a few descriptions of Caliban, one of the most debated figures in all of Shakespeare. Is this cursing, would-be rapist and wannabe killer nothing but a monster? Or, is this belligerent, iambic pentameter-speaking slave worthy of our sympathy? Is Caliban a response to Montaigne's vision of the "noble savage"? Is he symbolic of the victims of colonial expansion? Critical interpretations of Caliban are wildly different and have changed dramatically over the years. In fact, scholars get pretty fired up about how this character should be interpreted. Before we get carried away, let's start with what we do know.
Another of Prospero’s servants. Caliban, the son of the now-deceased witch Sycorax, acquainted Prospero with the island when Prospero arrived. Caliban believes that the island rightfully belongs to him and has been stolen by Prospero. His speech and behavior is sometimes coarse and brutal, as in his drunken scenes with Stephano and Trinculo (II.ii, IV.i), and sometimes eloquent and sensitive, as in his rebukes of Prospero in Act I, scene ii, and in his description of the eerie beauty of the island in Act III, scene ii (III.ii.).
The King of Denmark, Hamlet’s uncle, and the play’s antagonist. The villain of the play, Claudius is a calculating, ambitious politician, driven by his sexual appetites and his lust for power, but he occasionally shows signs of guilt and human feeling—his love for Gertrude, for instance, seems sincere.
Member of the Inner Party. A mysterious figure, O'Brien is at once Winston's enemy and his ally and is the reason for Winston's ultimate indoctrination to the Party. O'Brien is a personification of the Party, and much of the Party's doctrine is revealed through him.
O’Brien is a total mystery. This novel raises more questions about O’Brien than it answers. An Inner Party member and a large, burly man with a thick neck and a brutal face, he wears black overalls, which we think are supposed to give him an authoritative air. He is about forty-years-old, and Winston has an intellectual crush on him. Why? O’Brien has privileges that Winston doesn’t. If he is a member of the rebellious Brotherhood, as Winston believes, then he also has balls that Winston doesn’t. (If Winston is afraid to act, then O’Brien, or at least Winston’s conception of O’Brien, is a gutsier version of our protagonist.) A powerful and cunning man, O’Brien tricks Winston into believing that he is a member of the anti-Party Brotherhood. He is completely duplicitous. O’Brien approaches and inducts Winston into the group, but does that in order to set Winston up for the ultimate crime. Later, O’Brien even runs the show on Winston’s torturing. Talk about betrayal. At one point, he tells Winston that the Party had captured him himself a long time ago. Was O’Brien at one point rebellious, just like Winston? Who knows. We don’t really trust anything this guy says anymore. This is still a fascinating line, however. We don’t know if O’Brien was once rebellious, and, quite frankly, it doesn’t matter. Just as Winston comments that once a person is erased from history, he ceases to have ever existed, so once a person is converted, he ceases to have ever been a rebel. The ambiguity of O’Brien’s former role is more poignant than if we knew for sure that O’Brien used to be a rebel.Lastly, O’Brien’s character really hits home with this dual, conflicting emotions business. It starts with Julia, right? Winston both hates and wants to screw her. Similarly, throughout the text, Winston both admires and hates O’Brien. He also both loves and despises the Inner Party and, actually, Big Brother in general. "What is going on", you say? We direct you to the lovely little passage in the opening chapter that says, "War is Peace; Freedom is Slavery; and Ignorance is Strength." It’s almost as if we, the reader, get the same confusing and conflicting information that Winston does. It’s almost like we experience the same emotions and terror.
Eamon Bailey is one of the Circle's Three Wise Men, and he's by far the most prolific and the best loved of the three. Hired by Ty Gospodinov in the very early days of the company, Bailey is the public face of the Circle's apparently progressive, allegedly social justice-oriented politics. Bailey—or "Uncle Eamon," as he likes people to call him (1.3.65)—prefers to keep things casual. The first time Mae sees him give a major presentation at the Circle, he's wearing "jeans and a blue V-neck sweater" (1.8.3). When Mae meets with him for the serious talk that decides her fate at the company, he's wearing "khakis and a white button-down" (1.44.12). Bailey is a middle-aged surfer dude, a devoted husband, a proud father, and a modern-day Teddy Roosevelt—or so the Circlers see him (1.3.65). No wonder they cast Tom Hanks to play him in the film. As if to make his role at the Circle as obvious as possible, Bailey's personal appearance stands in stark contrast to that of Tom Stenton—a man who wears his wealth, not to mention his hunger for profit, on his impeccably tailored sleeve. Compared to Stenton, Bailey may as well be Santa Claus: he's "grey-haired, ruddy-faced, twinkly-eyed, happy and earnest" and "when he smiled, which was near-constantly, his mouth smiled, his eyes smiled, his shoulders even seemed to smile" (1.3.64). That's not too far a cry from a belly that jiggles like a bowlful of jelly.
Reverend Parris’s niece. Abigail was once the servant for the Proctor household, but Elizabeth Proctor fired her after she discovered that Abigail was having an affair with her husband, John Proctor. Abigail is smart, wily, a good liar, and vindictive when crossed.
Abigail Williams Parris' niece. She instigates the witch trials by falsely accusing others of witchcraft. She pretends to see spirits and instructs the other girls to pretend as well.
John Reed is Jane’s cousin, Mrs. Reed’s son, and brother to Eliza and Georgiana. John treats Jane with appalling cruelty during their childhood and later falls into a life of drinking and gambling. John commits suicide midway through the novel when his mother ceases to pay his debts for him.
Jane’s cousin John Reed is a good-for-nothing wastrel. As a child, he’s a bully, pushing Jane around, reminding her of her poverty, and trying to keep her from enjoying herself in any way despite the fact that he’s four years older than her and should really be a little more mature. What kind of fourteen-year-old boy needs to push around his ten-year-old female cousin in order to feel good about himself? As an adult, John Reed is a complete waste of space; all he does is spend money, gamble, get into debt, fail out of college, go to brothels, sponge off his mom, threaten to commit suicide, and threaten to hurt his own mom if she doesn’t keep giving him money. When he finally does commit suicide, only Mrs. Reed misses him. He doesn’t really have any redeeming features whatsoever, which makes him a pretty flat character, but it’s important that Jane learns to stand up to him.
The brother of Duke Senior and usurper of his throne. Duke Frederick’s cruel nature and volatile temper are displayed when he banishes his niece, Rosalind, from court without reason. That Celia, his own daughter, cannot mitigate his unfounded anger demonstrates the intensity of the duke’s hatefulness. Frederick mounts an army against his exiled brother but aborts his vengeful mission after he meets an old religious man on the road to the Forest of Ardenne. He immediately changes his ways, dedicating himself to a monastic life and returning the crown to his brother, thus testifying to the ease and elegance with which humans can sometimes change for the better.
The de Boys brothers (Orlando and Oliver) aren't the only dysfunctional siblings in As You Like It. The first thing we find about Duke Frederick is that he's banished his older brother from court and has also stolen his title. As Charles the wrestler/local gossip tells us, "the Old Duke [Senior] is banished by his younger brother, the new/ Duke [Frederick]" (1.1.98-99). Not only that, but Duke Frederick also boots Rosalind (his niece and his daughter's beloved BFF) out of his court, too. Why? Because he's afraid Rosalind is more popular than Celia. (Dang. Frederick's just as spiteful and petty as Oliver.) Still, Shakespeare was in a generous mood when he wrote As You Like It, so there's some hope for Duke Frederick. Toward the end of the play, we learn that Frederick has slapped together a posse to track down Duke Senior in the forest. Just as Frederick arrives at the Forest of Arden, he bumps into a "religious man" and decides to change his evil ways. Jaques de Boys tells us how it all went down: Duke Frederick, hearing how that every dayMen of great worth resorted to this forest,Address'd a mighty power; which were on footIn his own conduct, purposely to takeHis brother here and put him to the sword:And to the skirts of this wild wood he came,Where meeting with an old religious man,After some question with him, was convertedBoth from his enterprise and from the world,His crown bequeathing to his banish'd brother,And all their lands restored to them againThat were with him exiled. This to be true,I do engage my life. (5.4.159-171) Huh?! You're probably thinking that Duke Frederick's "conversion" is pretty sudden and so random that it's hardly believable. Well, you're absolutely right but that's OK because we totally get Shakespeare's point: Even the worst kind of human being can be redeemed.
Duke Frederick The "villain" of this comedy, he banishes his elder brother, and eventually he also exiles his brother's daughter, Rosalind, from the ducal palace. Just before the play ends, he is converted by a religious hermit, and, henceforward, he chooses to lead a monastic life in the Forest of Arden.
An historian and the antagonist of the novel. Sir Leigh Teabing is a knight, a Royal Historian, and an extremely wealthy man. He is crippled from polio and is not married. The Holy Grail has been his one passion for years, and the search for the Truth, which he believes to be present in the Grail, obsesses him. Eventually, his need to know turns him into a murderer. He creates an alter ego, the Teacher, who carries out his evil plot.
This guy is a hateful and spiteful dwarf who is only concerned for his own people. And he doesn't care about the means—just the ends. So he contemplates murder, refuses to follow orders, and even attempts to resurrect the evilest of evil doers, the White Witch—all to gain the power to meet his goals. Luckily, he's killed off before he can bring back the White Witch. And being the Pevensie he is, Peter gives his body a proper burial.
Joel Cairo works for Casper Gutman and is portrayed as a wimpy, delicate, sleazy "fairy." The character of Joel Cairo was based on a criminal Hammett arrested for forgery in Pasco, Washington in 1920. Hammett uses typical and offensive stereotypes of homosexuals as effeminate or womanish, which we can see in the opening description of Cairo's physical appearance: The girl returned with an engraved card—Mr. Joel Cairo. "This guy is queer," she said. "In with him, then, darling," said Spade. Mr. Joel Cairo was a small-boned dark man of medium height. His hair was black and smooth and very glossy. His features were Levantine. A square-cut ruby, its sides paralleled by four baguette diamonds, gleamed against the deep green of his cravat. His black coat, cut tight to narrow shoulders, flared a little over slightly plump hips. His trousers fitted his round legs more snugly than was the current fashion. The uppers of his patent-leather shoes were hidden by fawn spats. He held a black derby hat in a chamois-gloved hand and came towards Spade with short, mincing, bobbing steps. The fragrance of chypre came with him. (4.132) Notice the specific details in this paragraph: Cairo walks with "mincing, bobbing steps." He smells of chypre, a fragrance that is both citrusy and earthy. And he's wearing fancy gloves, a tailored suit, and patent-leather shoes. (If you want to see Cairo in action, check out this clip of Peter Lorre's performance in the 1941 film adaptation of the novel). Hammett's description of Cairo is a pretty unflattering and offensive portrayal of homosexuality. Cairo comes off as neat and meticulous when it comes to his clothes and the way he dresses. But in this case, Cairo isn't like the lovable Carson from Queer Eye for the Straight Guy or style guru Tim Gunn in Project Runway (we can't really picture Cairo saying "Make it work" to Spade....). In The Maltese Falcon, Spade is clearly suspicious and scornful of Cairo's appearance. Does Spade feel threatened by Cairo's homosexuality? In fact, many people have accused Hammett of being homophobic in these descriptions. Is Cairo a negative example of the dangers of homosexuality, or is Hammett simply providing a contrast to Spade's aggressive masculinity? We know very little about Cairo's motives in the novel. We assume that he works for Gutman because he's in it for the dough, so he is ruled by greed to a certain extent. But what's more important to note is Cairo's blatant affection for Wilmer, who we guess is his lover. When Spade tries to convince Gutman to use Wilmer as the scapegoat, Cairo is the first to defend Wilmer. And after Spade knocks Wilmer unconscious, Cairo frets over him, petting his hair and anxiously trying to revive him. Even though the novel pretty clearly looks down on homosexuality as unnatural and depraved, it is obvious that Cairo's feelings for Wilmer are genuine and heartfelt, something which can't be said of many of the other relationships in the novel.
Janice is the big seventh grade bully, the terror of the bus ride and the littler kids. She's big and mean, and at the beginning of the book we don't have much sympathy for the girl. Jess knows how to keep his head down and stay out of Janice's way, but kids as little as May Belle haven't learned that yet. Janice does things like steal little kids' Twinkies and enforce a caste policy on the school bus, where she has a special seat that nobody else can sit in.It seems admirable and sneaky of Jess and Leslie to write a fake love letter to embarrass Janice when she's mean to May Belle, since they can't beat her up in a physical fight. It's a clever way of dealing with a problem that has to be dealt with: if Jess doesn't try to get back at Janice, he'll lose May Belle's respect.But they, and we, feel badly for Janice afterwards. We learn later in the book that Janice's bullying comes from a darker place, and is really an example of someone perpetuating a cycle of abuse. In other words, because her father beats her up so badly, the only thing she knows how to do is be mean to other, weaker people. Leslie explains to Jess that Janice's father "really beats her. The kind of beatings they take people to jail for in Arlington" (7.85-87). What gets Janice is not the abuse – as if that's not bad enough – but the fact that her friend blabbed about it and everybody at school knows. That embarrasses her at a totally different level than the silly letter Jess and Leslie wrote.
Tartuffe's reputation precedes him. His name is the title, and the characters of this play spend all their time talking about him – but he doesn't even show up in person until Act 3. By this point, we've already heard what the rest of the characters think of him. In Act 1, Scene 1, Dorine calls him a fraud; Damis tells Madame Pernelle that his "every action makes me seethe and tremble/ With helpless anger" (1.1.24). Madame Pernelle, on the other hand, believes he's a "fine man" who "practises precisely what he preaches" (1.1.17). Orgon is similarly positive, if not quite as clear, in his praise. Tartuffe, he tells Cléante, "is a man who…a man who…an excellent man" (1.1.5).So, by Act 3, we know how Tartuffe is perceived, and we know what kind of trouble he's been causing, but we don't know him. He hangs over the play, a mysterious, malicious, bad, bad, bad influence. As it turns out, he is, of course, a bad dude, but he's also really...well…we don't know how to put this any other way…really lame. Which is to say, he's not the kind of villain who talks in a deep Darth Vader-esque growl or uses his incredible intellect to trick his victims. He just knows how to find the feeble-minded – in this case, Orgon – and exploit them.Now, we must admit that the whole eviction notice thing is pretty clever. However, most of what we actually see him doing on stage is pretty embarrassing. His (failed) seduction of Elmire is nothing short of pitiful. He actually tells her that he's "no angel," as if that will make her see him, a supposedly holy man, in a whole new light (3.3.29). Can you think of a cheesier line? We can't.His fundamental lack of suavity is what makes Tartuffe a memorable character. We get to laugh at him when he tries, rather awkwardly, to put his hand on Elmire's knee and fumbles with collar of her dress. We get to snicker when we see the easily detectable hollowness of his supposed piety. If he were totally smooth and effortlessly evil, we might like him too much. As it stands, we're both amused by him, and horrified by how easily he's come to dominate Orgon. When he finally gets his just deserts, sure we cheer, but we also hope that maybe, just maybe, he's capable of turning his life around.
Curley is the son of the ranch boss, so he's got a big head—which doesn't quite match up with his body. He used to be a lightweight fighter, and he just can't let go of the life: he picks fights just to prove himself on the ranch among other bigger (and better) men.
The boss’s son, Curley wears high-heeled boots to distinguish himself from the field hands. Rumored to be a champion prizefighter, he is a confrontational, mean-spirited, and aggressive young man who seeks to compensate for his small stature by picking fights with larger men. Recently married, Curley is plagued with jealous suspicions and is extremely possessive of his flirtatious young wife.
Humbert’s shadow and double. Quilty is a successful playwright and child pornographer who takes a liking to Lolita from an early age. He follows her throughout the story, ultimately kidnapping her away from Humbert. Though Lolita is in love with him, he eventually tires of her. Nabokov conceals Quilty’s importance to the story until nearly the end. Quilty is amoral, highly literate, and completely corrupt.
"A broad-backed man, baldish, in an oatmeal coat and dark-brown trousers" (2.18.3). Clare Quilty is Humbert's "brother" in lust, his double and worthy opponent in verbal skills. Quilty is a playwright and an admirer and maker of child pornography. Indeed, his love of young girls has already once run him into trouble with the law. By his characterization, Humbert manages to make Quilty seem even more corrupt and more perverse than him. To Humbert, Lolita must be protected from Quilty. Where Humbert "loves" and idolizes Lolita, we find out later that Quilty wants her to star in his porn movies, which is why he takes her to the Duk Duk Ranch.Quilty fervently trails Humbert and Lolita across the United States, leaving behind a trail of provocative clues (literary references, initials, inside jokes) in motel ledgers, generally making Humbert into a (more) paranoid and jealous lunatic. Switching cars and lurking around every corner, Quilty finally "abducts" Lolita from the hospital in Elphinstone – though she is all too willing to go and has been in cahoots with him all along. Remember – she planned the itinerary for the second trip.Even facing death, Quilty takes nothing seriously. As Humbert aims a pistol at him, he declares, "Now, soyons raissonnables. You will only wound me hideously and then rot in jail while I recuperate in a tropical setting" (2.35.77). He proves tough to kill, but after many shots, Humbert takes him down, reducing him to a "purple heap" (2.35.86). Shockingly, he is the only man Lolita ever really loves, or is "crazy about."
Grendel is a man-eating demon (never a good sign) that lives in the land of the Spear-Danes and attacks King Hrothgar's mead-hall, Heorot, every evening. The narrator of Beowulf claims that Grendel's motivation is hearing Hrothgar's bard sing songs about God's creation of the world, which rubs his demonic nature the wrong way. Whatever the reason, every night Grendel slaughters more Danes and feeds on their corpses after tearing them limb from limb. Although he can't be harmed by the blade of any edged weapon, Grendel finally meets his match when the Geatish warrior Beowulf takes him on in a wrestling match.
A demon descended from Cain, Grendel preys on Hrothgar’s warriors in the king’s mead-hall, Heorot. Because his ruthless and miserable existence is part of the retribution exacted by God for Cain’s murder of Abel, Grendel fits solidly within the ethos of vengeance that governs the world of the poem.
A dangerous figure who comes to Connie’s house and threatens her. Arnold has pale, almost translucent skin; his hair looks like a wig; and he appears both old and young at the same time. He seems like a demonic figure, perhaps even a nightmare rather than an actual human being, but his true character is never fully clarified. He speaks calmly and quietly to Connie, which makes him seem even more threatening, and in an ambiguous scene near the end of the story, he may attack her inside her home. He ultimately convinces Connie to get in the car with him.
Signs that a guy might be trouble: Ah, if only Connie spent less time listening to the radio and more time reading Shmoop. (Couldn't pass up an opportunity for shameless self-promotion.) As Connie tries to get a handle on Arnold, she realizes that: She recognized most things about him [...] even that slippery friendly smile of his, that sleepy dreamy smile that all the boys used to get across ideas they didn't want to put into words. [...] But all these things did not come together. (77) Arnold is a "blur," and every attempt to see him for what he really is only generates "dizziness" rather than mental clarity (94). That's because Arnold Friend is a blend of some familiar types from literature and pop culture. He's the Matthew McConaughey character from Dazed and Confused, the guy who still hangs out at high school way after he's graduated. But he's also got qualities that a long literary tradition associates with evil – like Milton's Satan in Paradise Lost or Dostoevsky's devil in The Brothers Karamazov. (Want more devilish connotations? Take out the "r's" from "Arnold Friend" and you're left with "An old fiend.") Like these great literary bad guys, Arnold can zero in on the weaknesses and desires of those around him – in this case, Connie's romantic fantasies. And like these incarnations of evil, Arnold's greatest tool of manipulation is a forked tongue. He's a travesty of morality, the "Friend" who isn't a friend. He keeps his promises, but his promises are all threats. Coming from his lips, the word "love" loses all of its idealistic connotations and becomes a violent and obscene thing. No matter what Connie says or does, Arnold keeps talking – and yet he reveals nothing about himself. He never physically coerces Connie to join him, but his words have the same force and pull as the actions he only threatens to take: "Soon as you touch the phone I don't need to keep my promise and can come inside [...] anybody can break through a screen door and glass and wood and iron or anything else if he needs to, anybody at all, and specially Arnold Friend." (116-118) Death or evil incarnate posing as an ordinary man: this is the mess of contradictions that makes Arnold Friend so terrifying and so unforgettable.
A Jewish moneylender in Venice. Angered by his mistreatment at the hands of Venice’s Christians, particularly Antonio, Shylock schemes to eke out his revenge by ruthlessly demanding as payment a pound of Antonio’s flesh. Although seen by the rest of the play’s characters as an inhuman monster, Shylock at times diverges from stereotype and reveals himself to be quite human. These contradictions, and his eloquent expressions of hatred, have earned Shylock a place as one of Shakespeare’s most memorable characters.
A police inspector who strictly believes in law and order and will stop at nothing to enforce France’s harsh penal codes. Javert is incapable of compassion or pity, and performs his work with such passion that he takes on a nearly animal quality when he is on the chase. He nurses an especially strong desire to recapture Valjean, whose escapes and prosperity he sees as an affront to justice. Ultimately, Javert is unable to say with certainty that Valjean deserves to be punished. This ambiguity undermines the system of belief on which Javert bases his life and forces him to choose between hypocrisy and honor.
Gloucester’s younger, illegitimate son. Edmund resents his status as a bastard and schemes to usurp Gloucester’s title and possessions from Edgar. He is a formidable character, succeeding in almost all of his schemes and wreaking destruction upon virtually all of the other characters.
There are some characters that seem like bad guys at first glance but reveal a soft heart when you look a little deeper. They might do bad things, but you can understand their struggles and get some insight into why they do what they do. Well, Rasheed is not that type of character. Rasheed, we're sorry to say, is rotten to the core. We see a few of the things that might have caused the rot, but nothing that could justify or explain the awful things that he does to Mariam, Laila, and Aziza. Sorry, loyal Shmoopers, but there are few jokes to be made about Rasheed. He's violent. He's cruel. He's manipulative. He's a raging misogynist. We all know how his first son died: he drowned in a lake while Rasheed got drunk. That was a turning point for him, sure, but we're not sure whether any dude who "shoved the barrel of [his] gun" into Laila's mouth has much going for him (3.40.56). Rasheed is pretty much the product of his society—and that's a big problem. In his eyes, men are always in charge, violence is always an effective solution, and women are always up to no good. He's bought these ideas hook, line, and sinker, and there's nothing in the world that can change his mind. You can see that in his—ahem—untimely end. Mariam pretty much had no choice but to kill him: Rasheed wanted blood. See, that's how bad Rasheed is: Mariam isn't a violent person, but she ends up a murderer. What kind of man brings his family to that point? Some might be tempted to view Rasheed in a sympathetic light because of the trauma in his past, but it's hard to defend someone who so thoughtlessly follows his worst impulses every step of the way.
The second planet the prince visits is inhabited by this character. Both allegorically and literally, this guy takes an adult obsession with an adult thing—that same obsession we see character after character repeat—to the max. He believes that everybody he meets should think he is awesome: “Ah! Ah! I am about to receive a visit from an admirer!” he exclaimed, from afar, when he first saw the little prince coming. For, to conceited men, all other men are admirers. (11.2-3) The conceited man can’t think of a scenario in which this isn’t true, or in which he isn’t the center of attention. In fact, the conceited man even changes the meanings of words to make them more about himself. When the little prince asks him, “‘What does that mean—“admire”?,’” the conceited man doesn’t say, “Admire means to think something or someone is awesome.” Instead, he defines the word “admire” in relation to himself, explaining, “‘To admire means that you regard me as the handsomest, the best-dressed, the richest, and the most intelligent man on this planet’” (11.14-15). It’s not exactly the same thing, is it? Back to allegory: In his own way, the conceited man’s approach to the world is as narrow as the king’s. In other words, the conceited man thinks the prince should admire him, just as the king assumes the prince is his subject. Each of these guys thinks the world revolves around him. And, as many critics observe, each of their worlds actually does. They are isolated and live on their own little planets. So, every one of these grown-ups that the little prince meets defines the world around him according to his own terms—each of them sees the world only as he thinks it is. They don’t realize what it means to see with the heart. In fact, they wouldn’t know the first thing about that.
The narrator and protagonist of . Humbert is an erudite European intellectual with an obsessive love for nymphets and a history of mental illness. He manages to seduce the reader with his gift for beautiful language, but he is nonetheless capable of rape and murder. Humbert, despite his knowledge of the world, becomes self-aware only toward the end of the novel, when he realizes he has ruined Lolita’s childhood. He writes the story of Lolita from his prison cell, where he awaits trial for murder. However, he dies of heart failure soon after Lolita’s death.
The narrator and protagonist of . Humbert is an erudite European intellectual with an obsessive love for nymphets and a history of mental illness. He manages to seduce the reader with his gift for beautiful language, but he is nonetheless capable of rape and murder. Humbert, despite his knowledge of the world, becomes self-aware only toward the end of the novel, when he realizes he has ruined Lolita’s childhood. He writes the story of Lolita from his prison cell, where he awaits trial for murder. However, he dies of heart failure soon after Lolita’s death.
Goneril Lear's eldest daughter who, after professing her deep love for her father, betrays him and plots his murder.
Lear’s ruthless oldest daughter and the wife of the duke of Albany. Goneril is jealous, treacherous, and amoral. Shakespeare’s audience would have been particularly shocked at Goneril’s aggressiveness, a quality that it would not have expected in a female character. She challenges Lear’s authority, boldly initiates an affair with Edmund, and wrests military power away from her husband.
Tom’s lover, whose lifeless husband George owns a run-down garage in the valley of ashes. Myrtle herself possesses a fierce vitality and desperately looks for a way to improve her situation. Unfortunately for her, she chooses Tom, who treats her as a mere object of his desire.
Myrtle Wilson Married lover of Tom Buchanan. Myrtle serves as a representative of the lower class. Through her affair with Tom she gains entrée into the world of the elite, and the change in her personality is remarkable. She conducts a secret life with Tom, wherein she exhibits all the power and dominance she finds lacking in her everyday life. She eventually suffers a tragic end at the hands of her lover's wife.
Myrtle Wilson is not too smart. If she were, she'd have recognized that Tom is Bad News. Look at the way she describes their meeting: It was on the two little seats facing each other that are always the last ones left on the train. I was going up to New York to see my sister and spend the night. He had on a dress suit and patent leather shoes, and I couldn't keep my eyes off him, but every time he looked at me I had to pretend to be looking at the advertisement over his head. When we came into the station he was next to me, and his white shirt-front pressed against my arm, and so I told him I'd have to call a policeman, but he knew I lied. I was so excited that when I got into a taxi with him I didn't hardly know I wasn't getting into a subway train. All I kept thinking about, over and over, was 'You can't live forever; you can't live forever.' (2.121) This is creepy, right? He stares her down on a train, shows up beside her in a way menacing enough for her to threaten to call the police, and then apparently practically forces her into a cab. Does he even say hello? Tell her his name? But this ridiculous performance of masculinity pushes Myrtle's buttons in all the right ways. George is passive, but Tom is controlling and authoritative—and she equates that with masculinity. Obviously Tom tells her his name at some point, and he also tells her a lot more: that the reason he can't leave his wife is because she's Catholic. And Myrtle, the poor fool, believes it. Daisy would be proud.
Hugh Hendon Miles's brother who usurps Miles's rightful place in the family and also marries the woman Miles loves. He pretends not to recognize Miles, and he is responsible for Miles' and the young prince's being imprisoned.
Hassan’s and Sohrab’s rapist and the novel’s antagonist. Assef represents all things wrong in Afghanistan. A racist who wishes to rid Afghanistan of Hazaras, he is incapable of remorse and enjoys inflicting violence and sexual abuse on those who are powerless. He even claims Hitler as a role model.
If Hassan represents all that is good and kind, Assef represents all that is evil and cruel. This guy is a flat-out villain. Even if we thought really, really hard, we're not sure we could come up with a single good quality in Assef. Here's just one example of Assef's sociopathic tendencies:He leaned toward me, like a man about to share a great secret. "You don't know the meaning of the word 'liberating' until you've done that, stood in a roomful of targets [the Hazaras in Mazar-i-Sharif], let the bullets fly, free of guilt and remorse, know you are virtuous, good, and decent. Knowing you're doing God's work. It's breathtaking." He kissed the prayer beads, tilted his head. (22.24)Assef is pretty much the textbook sociopath. Where the heck is Assef's conscience? Well, Assef has never really had a conscience. He displayed no remorse for his rape of Hassan, which occurs when Assef, Amir, and Hassan are only boys. Perhaps Assef simply doesn't see Hazaras as equal to Pashtuns – maybe that explains (though certainly doesn't excuse) his sadistic and cruel actions? More likely, racism is simply an additional evil on Assef's laundry list of cruelties, which also includes child molestation, rape, and murder.With Hassan it's never quite clear why he's so good. But with Assef the source of his evil remains a mystery. Assef is like an earthquake or a tornado: you just have to accept it as a destructive force. What's odd is that Amir often identifies himself with Assef, or with a Talib executioner. We guess this is what makes Amir interesting: he's caught between Hassan and Assef, two polar opposites that seem to made themselves at home in him. It's probably no coincidence Amir has to confront Assef in order to save Sohrab. If Amir is going to redeem himself, he's got to come face to face with the meanest, darkest part of himself.
A mysterious, confident, and resourceful man who seems to have been a mercenary soldier in Africa. Lombard is far bolder and more cunning than most of the other characters, traits that allow him to survive almost until the end of the novel. His weakness is his chivalrous attitude toward women, particularly Vera, with whom he has a number of private conversations. He cannot think of her as a potential killer, and he underestimates her resourcefulness, which proves a fatal mistake.
Philip Lombard is (1) a rather cocky young man, (2) essentially a mass murderer who left a large group of natives to die when he was in the army, and (3) completely unconcerned about his moral depravity, making him the second-to-last person to die. Philip does have one thing going for him: he’s not into the fauxpology. When asked about the crimes he’s accused of, Lombard is the first to readily admit that he did it while all the characters are still trying to lie about their pasts. But check out how he does it: “Not quite the act of a pukka sahib, I’m afraid. But self-preservation’s a man’s first duty. And natives don’t mind dying, you know. They don’t feel about it as Europeans do.” (4.45) He may admit his crime, but he’s not exactly sorry about it. (Seriously? “Natives don’t mind dying?” Oooookay.) What this tells us is that Lombard is an absolutely self-preserving character—and, based on the fact that he’s the only character who brings a weapon to the island, perhaps the cleverest of them all. In fact, when things start going downhill, Lombard doesn’t panic: “I’ve a pretty good imagination of my own. I’ve been in tight places before now and got out of them! I think—I won’t say more than that but I think I’ll get out of this one” (11.136). Even though he’s wrong—dead wrong sorrynotsorry—about getting through it, Lombard remains a man of action. He’s the one who wants to search the whole island. He’s the one who wants to seek out Dr. Armstrong when he goes missing. He’s the one who isn’t afraid of running into trouble because he knows how to handle trouble. In fact, Lombard isn’t even afraid of the idea that there’s a deranged lunatic tracking them down. When asked if he’s afraid of the dangerous murderer, he says: “Dangerous? Who’s afraid of the big bad wolf? I’ll be dangerous when I get a hold of him!” (7.175). In the end, Lombard proves to be both dangerous and a good sport: he makes it almost all the way to the end. But it turns out that Vera (with the influence of Justice Wargrave) is more dangerous than Lombard anticipated.
Cato, from District 2, is the strongest and most threatening male tribute in the Hunger Games. He is Katniss's main competition. Cato is a Career Tribute from one of the wealthiest districts in Panem, who has trained his whole life for the glory of the Games. For him, the Hunger Games are not so much a death sentence as a shot at eternal fame. As such, Cato is a character who is associated with power, strength, wealth, and brutality. Cato suffers a particularly slow and agonizing death at the hands of the Gamemakers' pack of mutant dogs. The Gamemakers refuse to step in and end his suffering and instead further dehumanize him by playing up the entertainment value of his death: "Why don't they kill him?" I ask Peeta. "You know why," he says, and pulls me closer to him. And I do. No viewer could turn away from the show now. From the Gamemakers' point of view, this is the final word in entertainment. (25.42-25.44) His death signals that even the wealthiest tributes are no match against the Gamemakers' cruelty. His loss in the Games makes us ask what kind of strength it really takes to win the Hunger Games.
Part of the Resistance movement, he was engaged to Lise Johansen, the oldest of the Johansen's three daughters, before she died. He visits the Johansen family occasionally, bringing them news and gifts. Annemarie thinks of him as her "almost-brother." Peter is the effective leader of the plan to get the Rosens to safety. His stoic bravery makes him seem older than his twenty years.
Tom’s last earthly master, the brutal Louisiana plantation owner Simon Legree, is one of the four most famous characters in Uncle Tom’s Cabin – but he doesn’t appear until two-thirds of the way through the novel. Legree’s fame isn’t based on his complexity – it’s hard to imagine a simpler character. When Legree swaggers into the auction at the slave warehouse, Tom starts shivering immediately, as if he supernaturally senses the man’s evil spirit. And Legree is evil, thoroughly and remorselessly evil. He has no redeeming features. He’s got a conscience, but he’s trampled it under and decided to behave with utterly inhuman cruelty. Once Legree appears, as savvy readers, we know that Tom is doomed.
Paris A noble young kinsman to the Prince. Paris is well-mannered and attractive and hopes to marry Juliet. Romeo fights and kills Paris at the Capulet tomb when Paris thinks that Romeo has come to desecrate the bodes of Tybalt and Juliet.
All you have to do to see why Paris (the guy who wears down Juliet's dad until he agrees to let him marry Juliet) is such a good foil for Romeo—and why Juliet chose Romeo over him—is to contrast what Paris and Romeo each say outside Juliet's grave: The obsequies that I for thee will keepNightly shall be to strew thy grave and weep. (5.3.16-17) Paris's language says: "I'm a stiff and lacking in passion." Notice how rhythmic and sing-songy his words are? How they rhyme in a tight, closed off, heroic couplet, almost like he Googled "How to mourn your dead fiancée?" Yeah, there's no way that Paris would die for Juliet. He's probably already crossing her name of his "Girls To Marry" list and moving on to next candidate. Meanwhile, here's Romeo:The time and my intents are savage-wildMore fierce and more inexorable farThan empty tigers or the roaring sea. (5.3.37-39) Romeo is furious over Juliet's death, and eloquent in his fury. He won't drip a few tears on Juliet's grave and then go home to bed. Unlike Paris, this guy is a passionate lover. (Oh, by the way? This isn't Shmoop's idea—and unlike Shakespeare, we like to give credit where credit's due.)
Proteus is a young nobleman from Verona. He's supposed to be Valentine's best friend and Julia's sweetie, but after he falls for Valentine's girlfriend, he stabs his BFF in the back and tries to rape Silvia. When he's confronted, he undergoes a sudden and miraculous transformation, which prompts him to make up with Valentine and fall back in love with Julia.Like the shape-shifting sea god he shares his name with, Proteus is pretty erratic and changeable, don't you think? He falls in and out of love (with women and his best friend) as often as some people change clothes, and he's also pretty crafty and deceptive. He has no trouble being two-faced as he betrays his best friend and he lies to just about everyone he knows.
Bishop of Opus Dei. Aringarosa is conservative in his religious views and longs for the Church to return to strict ways. He has affection for material things that represent the power of his order. He is kind to Silas.
Roger is totally that kid on the playground who used to torture ants with a magnifying glass. He's bad news going all the way back to when we first meet him, a "slight" and "furtive" boy with "an inner intensity of avoidance and secrecy" who "mutters" (1). Let's just say, you do not want to be stuck on a deserted island with Roger, because this guy is sadistic, plain and simple. While Jack wants power because he likes the thought of being in charge, Roger wants power because he likes the idea of hurting others. Even before things have started to go too wrong, we can tell. He and his buddy Maurice destroy the littluns' sandcastles for no reason at all, "kicking them over, burying the flowers, scattering the chosen stones. Maurice followed, laughing, and added to the destruction" (4.7-8). This goes way beyond not helping the kids pick fruit to straight up psycho behavior. Roger doesn't become a murderous psychopath all at once. At first, he's held back by the "taboo of the old life" (4.14). While he throws rocks in little Henry's general direction, he doesn't actually throw them at the kid: "round the squatting child was the protection of parents and school and policemen and the law" (4.14). For now. By the end, Roger has given in. He's the one who, with "delirious abandonment," drops the rock that kills Piggy. Not convinced that Roger is bad news? Sam and Eric hint at unspeakable—literally—horrors, when they say: of Sam and Eric's exchange: "You don't know Roger. He's a terror." "And the chief—they're both—" "—terrors—" "—only Roger—" (11) Only Roger what? We don't know, and we're not sure we want to. Is Golding saying that even beasts come in degrees—that some people are worse than others, even if we're all savages? Or is he saying the opposite? Could it be that Roger is actually the most human of them all?
The straitlaced steward—or head servant—in the household of Lady Olivia. Malvolio is very efficient but also very self-righteous, and he has a poor opinion of drinking, singing, and fun. His priggishness and haughty attitude earn him the enmity of Sir Toby, Sir Andrew, and Maria, who play a cruel trick on him, making him believe that Olivia is in love with him. In his fantasies about marrying his mistress, he reveals a powerful ambition to rise above his social class.
Scrooge's long-dead business partner is the first ghostly visitor who haunts him, warning him about the Christmas ghosts soon to come. Marley is your run-of-the-mill worst-case scenario. Why does he come to visit Scrooge before the Christmas ghosts show up? Well, mostly because without showing us the horrible horrific horror that awaits a Scrooge who doesn't change his ways, Marley ups the stakes of the Christmas ghosts' visits. Basically, this first ghost is a dramatic tension device, meant to make us care about Scrooge's reform and also meant to explain why Scrooge would suddenly become concerned about and invested in his own rehabilitation. After all, who would want to be condemned to an eternity of being "doomed to wander through the world […] and witness what it cannot share, but might have shared on earth, and turned to happiness!"? (1.129). Certainly not us.
By the time Goblet of Fire came out, J.K. Rowling had gotten a huge dose of fame. She had been a bestselling writer for three years, and her books were already known as a publishing phenomenon. Thus, it makes sense that a lot of journalists saw pointed criticism of the press in the depiction of Rita Skeeter, evil journalist extraordinaire. Maybe J.K. Rowling included Rita Skeeter in Book 4 because she knew people like Rita by then? But no! J.K. Rowling insists that she had always planned to have a character of this kind in her fourth Harry Potter book:[W]hen I got the point in the writing where I had to introduce Rita, I did hesitate, because I thought, People will think this is my response to what's happened to me. But I had a lot more fun writing Rita than I think I would have done if it hadn't happened to me. (source)So even though Rita Skeeter had been planned from the beginning, J.K. Rowling might have written her with a bit more zest once she knew so many more journalists like Rita in real life. There's something a bit ironic about J.K. Rowling writing about the burden of Harry's fame just as she herself is beginning to feel her own fame. Even if the resemblance is unintentional, we think it's worth pointing out.Rita Skeeter has always been an essential part of the Harry Potter series. In a BBC special, J.K. Rowling also revealed,Originally, Rita Skeeter turned up in Book One. Harry enters the Leaky Cauldron, which is the place where he gets his very first taste of how famous he is. For the first time it hits him. And there's a very early draft of that chapter, in which Rita made a beeline for him. But this gutter journalist fits better in Book Four, which when the pain of fame starts to drag at Harry. (source)Rita Skeeter is the worst kind of journalist because she's more interested in generating an exciting story than in telling the truth. She also has absolutely no qualms about exploiting someone to sell papers. When she "interviews" Harry about being the second Hogwarts Triwizard champion, she presents him as a weepy, tragic orphan – absolutely the last public image Harry wants. Later, when Hermione shouts at Rita Skeeter for outing Hagrid as a half-giant (and making it sound like he's dangerous), Rita Skeeter abuses her position as a reporter to get back at Hermione. She publishes an article saying that Hermione is stringing along two famous young men, Harry and Viktor Krum. Even though Hermione laughs off the article, she starts getting hate mail from people who really do think she's a bad person.Worst of all, when Harry firmly turns his back on Rita Skeeter, she prints a piece claiming that Harry is dangerously unbalanced. She implies that he's lying about his curse scar pain in order to get attention, and she includes a quote from Draco Malfoy: "[H]e's made friends with werewolves and giants too. We think he'd do anything for a bit of power" (31.48). Harry tries to laugh off this article the way Hermione shrugs off Rita's earlier love triangle piece, but it still proves to have serious effects. Cornelius Fudge uses Rita Skeeter's article as a way to cast doubt on Harry's account of what happened to him in the Little Hangleton graveyard. He strongly implies that Harry is subject to hallucinations, and that he's just imagining the return of Voldemort.Hermione comes up with a way to control Rita Skeeter by the end of Goblet of Fire. She realizes that Rita is an Animagus, a wizard that can change into an animal. All wizards capable of this transformation are supposed to register their Animagus form with the Ministry of Magic. But Rita Skeeter has never done so. Her secret form is a beetle, and she uses this small, easily ignored body to spy on private conversations and publish them openly. That's how Rita Skeeter found out about Hermione's relationship with Viktor Krum and Harry's fit of scar pain during Divination class.In exchange for keeping quiet about her unregistered Animagus form, Rita Skeeter has to promise not to publish any lies about anyone for a whole year. Hermione wants her to "see if she can't break the habit of writing horrible lies about people" (37.107). But we have the strong suspicion that it will take more than a spot of well-intentioned blackmail to keep Rita Skeeter from writing "horrible lies." It's her thing, after all, it's what she does.
"Aaron the Moor" is Tamora's secret lover and the diabolical mastermind behind the plot to destroy the Andronicus family. He's also, in our humble opinion, the play's most fascinating character.
The seventh and youngest son of the 81st Lord of Stormhold, Septimus is a bit of a puzzle: "Septimus, his black beard still coming in, tall and crowlike, looked blank, as he always looked blank" (3.12). There's darkness inside him, though, and he's a murderous type of fellow, having killed two of his siblings already (Quintus and Sextus); he manages to off Tertius as well. We learn that "by temperament, Septimus was one of nature's poisoners. Blades and blows and booby traps were well enough in their way, but a vial of clear liquid, any trace of taste or odor gone when it was admixtured with food, that was Septimus's métier" (9.5). Well, it's good to know that he has a hobby. Fate helps Septimus out by killing Primus… but Septimus still has to avenge his brother's death before he can seek the topaz that will make him Lord of Stormhold. Ugh. He is not thrilled about this, telling the corpse, "'now I must revenge your sad carcass, and all for the honor of our blood and the Stormhold'" (8.9). Tell us how you really feel, why don't you? Septimus decides to try to take revenge on the old woman who killed Primus by setting her hut on fire and waiting outside the only door with a club. She gets the jump on him, though, by having a poisonous snake bite him with a lethal dose, which is somewhat ironic given his own fondness for poisons. The poison kills him, and even if it hadn't, would he really have had a chance against one of the Lilim? Sorry, Septimus, you're pretty crafty, but we think you're out of your league in this fight. His ghost joins those of his brothers, and now that they know that none of them will attain the throne, they vanish from the earth.
We could try to describe Artemis, but let's be honest—there's no one quite like him. He is, as we like to say when we're feeling fancy and lofty and literary, what you might call an enigma. So one of the best ways to tackle Artemis as a character, in fact, is actually to look at how he relates to a few of the other major players (which is usually not well).
The big bad villain of the novel. Or is he? Blandois is a spy, an acquitted murderer, a blackmailer, and a man whose main goal in life is to constantly act like a gentleman. He is never shown to be anything but evil, menacing, and generally bad news. In some ways, Blandois is almost a cartoony bad guy. With his funny mustache, we wouldn't be surprised to see him tying some damsel in distress to train tracks and cackling gleefully. Every single person who comes into contact with him is immediately frightened and repelled, and no one is ever even remotely deceived about his intentions. And yet, even this seemingly totally one-note character has some complicating quirks. No, we don't mean that he has some backstory explaining why he's such a rotten egg. But he has a quality in common with Dorrit, and to a lesser extent with Merdle: he is obsessed with, totally strict about, and extremely serious in his pursuit of always acting and being seen as a gentleman. Next to all the crimes he commits, it's his number one interest and concern. Now, to Blandois, being a gentleman generally means something a little different than to Dorrit or the other guys – in his case, it's about always being served by others and treating the ladies with off-putting charm and gallantry. But still – why does he have this trait in common with the novel's other imposters? How are we meant to compare them? What makes them different from each other? Is there a sliding scale of poser morality?
Is there anything at all likeable about Sikes? Seriously, what does Nancy see in this guy? Sikes is brave and strong, for sure, and he’s a straight shooter. He doesn’t like it when Fagin talks around the point or tries to cover things up. He’s no liar, whatever else he might be. And maybe he's super-hawt? But he’s also stubborn, distrustful, and has what you might call some anger management issues. Oh, Nancy. We know bad boys are sexy, but did you have to go for one that is so completely terrible?And where did ol' Dickens get the idea for such a character? Well, there was actually a historical criminal named James Sikes a.k.a. "Hell and Fury," (a.k.a. what an awesome nickname) who lived (and was hanged) in the 1720's—a period of criminal history that Dickens was particularly interested in. William Makepeace Thackeray—another Victorian novelist who was very critical of Oliver Twist and all "Newgate novels" from the start—said that readers (and especially young male readers) couldn’t help but "to have for Bill Sikes a kind of pity and admiration," that couldn’t be good for their morals. Dickens defended himself by saying that he had depicted criminals in their true colors, and that there was nothing sympathetic about Sikes that would be dangerous to readers’ morals. What do you think: is this true? Does Dickens ever draw on the reader’s sympathy for Sikes?
A brutal professional burglar brought up in Fagin’s gang. Sikes is Nancy's pimp and lover, and he treats both her and his dog Bull’s-eye with an odd combination of cruelty and grudging affection. His murder of Nancy is the most heinous of the many crimes that occur in the novel.
Fagin is pretty clearly a bad guy. We're not quibbling with the fact that a dude who thinks, "Ooh! Million dollar idea! Let's turn little boys into crooks!" is basically wearing a sticker that says Hello, My Name Is Evil.
A conniving career criminal. Fagin takes in homeless children and trains them to pick pockets for him. He is also a buyer of other people’s stolen goods. He rarely commits crimes himself, preferring to employ others to commit them—and often suffer legal retribution—in his place. Dickens’s portrait of Fagin displays the influence of anti-Semitic stereotypes.
The fifteen-year-old narrator and protagonist. Alex is the vicious leader of a gang of criminals who occasionally go to school by day and then rape and pillage by night. He loves classical music and finds that violence and music provide him with similar kinds of aesthetic pleasure. Alex believes that commitment to ideals—whatever those ideals might be—is of paramount importance, and he disdains people who seem to him to be living without purpose. Despite Alex’s brutality and his natural leadership potential, Alex remains quite naïve and immature, which allows him to be manipulated by both the government and F. Alexander’s political dissidents.
The fifteen-year-old narrator and protagonist. Alex is the vicious leader of a gang of criminals who occasionally go to school by day and then rape and pillage by night. He loves classical music and finds that violence and music provide him with similar kinds of aesthetic pleasure. Alex believes that commitment to ideals—whatever those ideals might be—is of paramount importance, and he disdains people who seem to him to be living without purpose. Despite Alex’s brutality and his natural leadership potential, Alex remains quite naïve and immature, which allows him to be manipulated by both the government and F. Alexander’s political dissidents.
The fifteen-year-old narrator and protagonist. Alex is the vicious leader of a gang of criminals who occasionally go to school by day and then rape and pillage by night. He loves classical music and finds that violence and music provide him with similar kinds of aesthetic pleasure. Alex believes that commitment to ideals—whatever those ideals might be—is of paramount importance, and he disdains people who seem to him to be living without purpose. Despite Alex’s brutality and his natural leadership potential, Alex remains quite naïve and immature, which allows him to be manipulated by both the government and F. Alexander’s political dissidents.
The fifteen-year-old narrator and protagonist. Alex is the vicious leader of a gang of criminals who occasionally go to school by day and then rape and pillage by night. He loves classical music and finds that violence and music provide him with similar kinds of aesthetic pleasure. Alex believes that commitment to ideals—whatever those ideals might be—is of paramount importance, and he disdains people who seem to him to be living without purpose. Despite Alex’s brutality and his natural leadership potential, Alex remains quite naïve and immature, which allows him to be manipulated by both the government and F. Alexander’s political dissidents.
The fifteen-year-old narrator and protagonist. Alex is the vicious leader of a gang of criminals who occasionally go to school by day and then rape and pillage by night. He loves classical music and finds that violence and music provide him with similar kinds of aesthetic pleasure. Alex believes that commitment to ideals—whatever those ideals might be—is of paramount importance, and he disdains people who seem to him to be living without purpose. Despite Alex’s brutality and his natural leadership potential, Alex remains quite naïve and immature, which allows him to be manipulated by both the government and F. Alexander’s political dissidents.
Dim and George are initially members of Alex's gang. Dim is your stereotypical strong-but-dumb thug (dude's name is "Dim," after all) but he has a problem with Alex's authority. Georgie is smarter and more ambitious—he leads the rebellion against Alex for the sake of financial gain. Both are traitors to Alex: Dim incapacitates Alex at the Manse site, leading to his arrest, and ultimately becomes a police officer, thanks to the program introduced by the Minister of the Interior. In this position, he gets even with Alex. Georgie dies in a later raid.
A member of Alex’s gang. Georgie is the most ambitious of Alex’s first gang, and leads the rebellion against Alex. Unlike Alex, who is interested in violence for the pure sake of violence, Georgie is interested in violence for the sake of financial gain.
Moll Flanders is the ultimate trickster. We spend four hundred pages with her and learn a bunch of intimate details about her life, including her romantic relationships, her sex life, and the status of her bank account, but we never learn her real name. We know almost everything and at the same time absolutely nothing. The more Moll tells us, the more she keeps to herself. By the end, we know that she was a born in prison, had five husbands, became a criminal, and then redeemed herself. But still, we're left wondering, just who is this girl? And if you're curious about all this trickery, check out our Theme sections on "Identity," "Authorship," and "Criminality," and then come back here to read more about Moll.
Moll's real mother is less character, more plot device. She comes and goes so quickly that we hardly have the chance to get to know here. And neither does Moll for that matter. Nevertheless, it's this mother who gives birth to Moll in prison and starts her life on its – shall we say eventful? – journey. Because of her mom's petty thievery, Moll is born in prison. Her mother is then exiled to America when Moll is still a baby, and Moll grows up never knowing her. If you wanted to go there, you could even argue that it's her mother's fault that Moll ends up in that unfortunate situation with the Colchester brothers. If she'd grown up with her parents that probably wouldn't have happened.
If Maddy and Az are the good adults, and Sol and Ellie are the well-meaning but not-so-smart adults, then Dr. Cable must be the bad adult. (What other kinds are there?) Dr. Cable heads up Special Circumstances, or at least the anti-Tally division of Special Circumstances. So she's in charge of blackmailing Tally into infiltrating the Smoke; she's in charge of trailing Tally to the Smoke; and she's in charge of making all the captives into nice, conforming pretties. In other words, everything bad that happens in this book is probably Dr. Cable's doing. Think Dolores Umbridge or President Snow. Usually, we like to find some redeeming feature in our villains, but there's not much to like about Cable here. When Tally tells Cable that the runaways use hoverboards, Cable sneers like the evil principal from an '80s movie complaining about skateboards: "Of course a hoverboard. What is it about those things and miscreants?" (16.33). When Tally is brought to her in the Smoke and makes some excuse about why she was fighting back, Cable insults her: "Self-preservation. Well, at least you're good at something" (35.14). Even Shay, when she's pretty and likes everyone, recognizes that Cable is a monster: "I know Dr. C was horrible to you" she says to Maddy (48.37). Cable is almost a cartoonish villain,without a single redeeming quality. So, just guessing, that means that in the later books, Westerfeld will probably give her some redeeming features, just because he likes to mess with us. And, looked at from one angle, Dr. Cable helps Tally by sending her to the Smoke. That is, it's helpful to Tally to go to the Smoke since Tally learns more about how the world really works and comes to think of the Smoke as her home. Of course, then Cable destroys the Smoke. So, that makes it about even.
John Ashpool is not having the best day when we meet him. He's just been woken after a thirty-year cryogenic sleep, and it seems he wasn't having pleasant dreams. To quote him directly, "They told us we wouldn't dream, in that cold. They told us we'd never feel cold, either… Lies. Of course I dreamed" (15.79). The result is that Ashpool awakens in a state of delusion and paranoia, which leads him straight to suicide (almost). But then again, Ashpool did strangle his wife to prevent her plans for the Tessier-Ashpool family and the AIs to come to fruition. So maybe he wasn't all there to begin with—30 years of frozen sleep or no. Ashpool shows us how the Tessier-Ashpool lineage has fallen. Sure they're still richer than Bill Gates, Warren Buffett, and Mark Zuckerberg combined, but they're falling apart internally because they refuse to change. The cryofreeze, the clones, the antiques piling up in Straylight, all of these things manifest in John Ashpool's character and show us the cost of maintaining too tight a control on the world around you. Eventually, it'll all fall apart. After waking from cryosleep, Ashpool kills one of the Jane clones and is all set to commit suicide when Molly runs into him during her incursion into Straylight. She does what she does best and shoots old Johnny boy right in the eye.
The person with the highest IQ in Erudite, and the faction’s leader and representative on the city’s political council. She masterminds a war against Abnegation and develops a serum to control the Dauntless.
Mr. Thompson Mr. Thompson is the Head of State. He is utterly pragmatic, contemptuous of principles or convictions, and driven by the expediency of the moment. He will make any deal necessary with anybody in order to keep himself in power. Mr. Thompson even believes that he can cut a deal with John Galt who, in his view, has control of a political pressure group — the men of brains. Mr. Thompson is honestly puzzled by Galt's unwillingness to make a deal with him. In his cynical view, there is no such thing as a man not open to a corrupt deal.
Dagny Taggart The novel's heroine, Dagny Taggart is Galt's most dangerous enemy but also the woman he loves. Dagny is a brilliant engineer/businesswoman who runs a transcontinental railroad expertly. Her strength of purpose and impassioned commitment to the railroad enables her to withstand the injustices of the looters' regime and, by her prodigious productivity, inadvertently sustain that regime. She is the primary foe that Galt must defeat.
The novel may be obsessed with the question "Who is John Galt?" but first we need to ask, who is Dagny Taggart? At first glance, Dagny may seem like the easiest character to figure out. She's the star of the whole shebang, and we get almost an excess of information about her – compared to other characters at least. But she's really one of the most mystifying and complicated people in the book. Dagny makes a lot of polarizing choices that can be hard to understand. And things are further complicated by the fact that we often experience the book's roller-coaster ride of events and emotions through her eyes. So let's break Dagny down into her various component parts and see what we come up with.
The novel’s protagonist and vice president in charge of operations of Taggart Transcontinental. Dagny is Galt’s greatest love and worst enemy. Her brilliant management style and unwavering commitment to the railroad enable her to remain in the world of the “looters”—Rand’s word for the people and government agencies that seize property from capitalists—and to keep her railroad running despite the growing chaos. In so doing, she continues to provide the looters with transportation that sustains their system. She mistakenly believes the looters are capable of reason and will understand their mistakes before it is too late. When she realizes the looters are in fact agents of death, she withdraws and is the last to join the strike.
James Taggart Dagny's older brother and the President of Taggart Transcontinental, Jim is a "looter" — a businessman who seeks gain not by productive work but by political connections. The difference between Dagny and her brother is shown in their reactions to Dan Conway's Phoenix-Durango Railroad. They both want to put the competitor out of business. Dagny wishes to do so by building Taggart's Rio Norte Line into a more efficient road, whereas Jim seeks to destroy the Phoenix-Durango by political decree. Where Dagny stands for production, Jim stands for force. Jim is motivated by his hatred of good men and his desire to kill such individuals as Dagny, Rearden, Francisco, and Galt.
Dagny’s brother and president of Taggart Transcontinental. An inferior businessman, Jim excels at influence peddling and becomes highly skilled at manipulating the system. Though he claims to be motivated by both personal wealth and public service, his true motive is destruction of the productive. Jim carefully represses the nature of his depravity, but his final encounter with John Galt completely shatters his illusions.
Ellsworth Toohey Architectural critic and spiritual power broker. Toohey is simultaneously a cult leader acquiring a private army of slavish followers and a Marxist intellectual preaching socialism to the masses. Roark's refusal to obey threatens his hegemony in his own field, so he dedicates himself to Roark's destruction. The villain of the novel, Toohey represents collectivism in its most undiluted form.
There are a few professions that just scream "evil." Mad scientist, corrupt politician, creepy motel owner, art critic… wait, what? Art critic?
The villain of the novel, and Roark’s antithesis—a man with a lust for power but no talent. Since his boyhood, Toohey has despised the achievements of others, and he dedicates himself to squelching other people’s talents and ambitions. He is a small and fragile-looking man, but his persuasive voice and knack for manipulation make him a formidable opponent. He encourages selflessness and altruism to coax others into submission. His philosophy is a blend of religion, Fascism and Socialism, and he at times resembles the Russian dictator Joseph Stalin.
Mustapha Mond The World Controller, intellectually and politically powerful. He offers a historical view of the brave new world at the beginning of the novel and later debates John and Helmholtz on society's values. Mond sentences Bernard and Helmholtz to be banished to the Falkland Islands and determines that John must stay in London.
Mustapha spends pretty much all of his time lecturing, discoursing, dialoguing, and just plain chatting everyone up. This guy is a talker, so it's not surprising to us that Huxley makes a point of noting the quality of his voice. Just look at how his character is introduced: "'The results were terrible.' A deep resonant voice broke startlingly into the dialogue."Before we know who he is and what he looks like, we know about Mustapha's voice. Shortly after we get mention of "his strong deep voice" and the fact that "his voice sent a strange thrill quivering along [the students'] diaphragms." The very next time Mustapha enters the picture is over the phone, when Bernard hears "the deep, resonant voice of Mustapha Mond." But the big important moment is in Chapter 16, when Huxley drives the message home: "The deep voice thrillingly vibrated; the gesticulating hand implied all space and the onrush of the irresistible machine. Mustapha Mond's oratory was almost up to synthetic standards."In a word… A-ha! Now we can see the connection. Voices tend to be brainwashing, controlling forces in Brave New World, starting with the soothing auditory hypnopaedia of youth to the synthetic music boxes to the disembodied voice used to calm the riot in Chapter 15. Since Mustapha is a World Controller, it makes sense that he personally embodies one of the key instruments of control.But most interesting are the few key passages where Mustapha isn't speaking. In particular, we're thinking of that bit in Chapter 12 when we momentarily jump to Mustapha reading a biology paper about purpose and deciding that it can't be published. We see that he admires the paper—which makes sense for a former scientist—but he doesn't really hesitate to trash it anyway. The most we see in the way of internal dissent is a sigh and the thought that life would be so much more fun if one didn't have to think about happiness.In Chapter 16, the novel picks up with Mustapha right where he left off in Chapter 12. Mustapha declares that "happiness is a hard master—particularly other people's happiness." Then why, oh why, did this former rock-star-physicist choose to abandon science, truth, beauty, and religion, all in the name of other people's happiness?This is a great question. So great, in fact, that when Helmholtz directly asks it, Mustapha doesn't really give an answer. He explains the choice he was given, but he doesn't explain why he made his decision. This means it's time to speculate. If Mustapha chose to pursue political power over scientific truth, it means that he suffers from the same flawed system of values as Bernard. (Power and status are more important than truth and beauty.) Or, you could argue that Mustapha genuinely believes in the system of the World State; he's not compromising his values, he's fighting for them.The other big Mustapha question has to do with freedom. Every citizen of the World State, he says, goes through life in a bottle. Alphas have larger bottles, but they're still imprisoned. So… what about Mustapha? Is he is his own ginormous bottle? When you think about the fact that Mustapha "serves" happiness, a "difficult master," he doesn't sound too liberated. On the other hand, he explicitly declares that, since he gets to make the rules, he gets to break them. It sounds to us, once again, that it's time to speculate.
The Resident World Controller of Western Europe, one of only ten World Controllers. He was once an ambitious, young scientist performing illicit research. When his work was discovered, he was given the choice of going into exile or training to become a World Controller. He chose to give up science, and now he censors scientific discoveries and exiles people for unorthodox beliefs. He also keeps a collection of forbidden literature in his safe, including Shakespeare and religious writings. The name Mond means “world,” and Mond is indeed the most powerful character in the world of this novel.
Jack is an extremely sympathetic character. His power as a protagonist lies in his deep desire, and great potential, to be a good person – a good father, a good husband, and a good writer. Yet, he's a tragic figure with very specific demons, namely his temper, his alcoholism, and the memory of his abusive, alcoholic father. The Overlook, and whatever it is that lurks there, magnifies the intensity of Jack's demons. The hotel transforms Jack from protagonist with occasional bouts of antagonism, to a full-blown antagonist. But even in Jack's horrific final moments, slivers of love remain. Let's take a deeper look at Jack Torrance, who has more than earned his place in the horror hall of fame.
Jack is an extremely sympathetic character. His power as a protagonist lies in his deep desire, and great potential, to be a good person – a good father, a good husband, and a good writer. Yet, he's a tragic figure with very specific demons, namely his temper, his alcoholism, and the memory of his abusive, alcoholic father. The Overlook, and whatever it is that lurks there, magnifies the intensity of Jack's demons. The hotel transforms Jack from protagonist with occasional bouts of antagonism, to a full-blown antagonist. But even in Jack's horrific final moments, slivers of love remain. Let's take a deeper look at Jack Torrance, who has more than earned his place in the horror hall of fame.
Jack's mother isn't named, and Jack doesn't express love for her. She was regularly abused by Jack's father. When Jack was nine, he watched his father beat her with a cane at the dinner table in front of the whole family. In the hospital, she backs up her husband's lie – that her injuries are from a fall. Unlike Wendy, she's entirely passive and, apparently, does nothing to shield herself or her children from abuse. She's a tragic figure who doesn't seem to have a voice at all.
Jack's mother isn't named, and Jack doesn't express love for her. She was regularly abused by Jack's father. When Jack was nine, he watched his father beat her with a cane at the dinner table in front of the whole family. In the hospital, she backs up her husband's lie – that her injuries are from a fall. Unlike Wendy, she's entirely passive and, apparently, does nothing to shield herself or her children from abuse. She's a tragic figure who doesn't seem to have a voice at all.
In many ways, Danny is every parent's dream. He's intelligent, patient, loving, adventuresome, forgiving, and kind. Everybody who sees him recognizes he's something special, even the gloomy Overlook manager, Ullman. Part of Stephen King's mass appeal is his ability to tap into childhood, to take the child's perspective on some deep dark matters. Children often perceive much more of adults' doings than adults often suspect. King's decision to delve into the mind of this unusual five-year-old is brilliant and bold and very scary.As you probably already know, Danny can read minds, which might or might not knock him out of the running for the every-parent's dream kid contest. Like some of King's other supernatural child and young adult stars, including Carrie from King's first novel, Carrie, Danny struggles with his abilities in relative isolation. He doesn't know if there are others of his kind, nor quite what to do with what's inside him. Neither do his parents, in part because Danny's gift comes with some very alarming behavior. The hardest thing to talk about in terms of Danny is the issue of child abuse. In Jack's section we talk lots about father-son relationships, so be sure to check that out for more on this aspect of Danny. Jack's father abused him regularly, and Jack physically injures Danny three times. 1) He drops baby Danny when drunk. 2) Also drunk, he breaks Danny's arm when Danny tears up his study and pours beer on Jack's writing. 3) Sober, but under the influence of the Overlook, Jack slaps Danny for calling him out on his experience with the moving hedge animals.Danny knows but doesn't know that Jack is the one chasing him with the mallet in his visions. As we delve into in "What's Up With the Title?" (which is chock full of Danny), Danny's will to love his father and his unwavering belief in his father's love for him are the things that save him from death. In "What's Up With the Ending?" we suggest that Danny's love for his father and his courage in standing up to him may have broken the cycle of father on son violence that haunts the Torrance family. Read it and see what you think…
Wendy is a brave, courageous woman whose heroics help save her son, herself, and Dick Halloran. She suffers three broken ribs, a busted upper calf, a scraped ear, a "shattered vertebra" (58.5), and "internal injuries" (58.5) – all from Jack, the mallet, and the stairs where there battle occurs.This is the first time Jack has physically abused Wendy that we know of. Remember this moment, when Wendy finds Jack in the ballroom drunk, just before she locks him in the pantry? Jack's come to and grabs her ankle. When she protests he says, "I'll hurt more than your ankle, you b****" (46.67). We are told that, "The words stunned her so completely that she made no effort to move when he let go of her ankle […]" (46.68). Jack has spoken harshly to her before, but, even when drunk, hasn't really physically threatened her or called her names. That's why she's so shocked.In the tradition of Sarah Connor, and Scream's Sidney Prescott, Wendy is also a special kind of horror woman because she survives. She keeps doing things that don't seem very smart – the kinds of things that can get a character killed. Some of her actions make the reader cringe in suspense. A prime example is the way she keeps going to check on Jack. Like Danny and Jack, Wendy is propelled by curiosity. Wendy's curiosity about Jack's state is part self preservation and part genuine concern for her husband.Wendy is trying to balance staying alive, protecting her son, and trying not to utterly abandon her husband. Like Jack and Danny, Wendy thinks of the Overlook as their last chance for success as a family. But, when she sees what the hotel is doing to Jack and Danny, particularly Danny, she becomes much more pragmatic and comes up with some options. When they are indeed trapped, she knows things might come to violence, which is why she carries around the kitchen knife when things get grim.Another thing that keeps Wendy from trying her very hardest to get out of the Overlook is her fear that she'll have to go and live with her mother. Wendy is afraid she won't survive the winter if she does that. We can't really blame her. Her unnamed mother sounds pretty gruesome and dysfunctional. It wouldn't be a good environment for Danny either. The boy is aware of all this, and it contributes to Danny's clinging to the hotel. Similarly, Danny's fear of DIVORCE and losing his beloved father impacts Wendy's early decision making processes.
Dan the bandit is ironically named for the first king of Danland, but he follows none of the realm's rules. He's a mean dude who's just out for personal profit, and he's reckless enough to make the girls fear for their lives: "You're the troublemaker," he said, and his mouth stank of meat. "I'll see you broken and dead." (22.35) But Dan underestimates the girls and their cleverness. He seems to think that he can win with sheer brute strength, but in the end it's little Miri's ingenuity that gets to him and he ends up tumbling off a cliff. Guess he should have looked where he was going.
A poor orphan of low birth, Becky Sharp is a born hustler and almost sociopathic striver who manages to raise herself to the upper limits of high society and wealth, only to see her achievements crumble under the weight of her bad deeds. Evil temptress or misunderstood woman ahead of her time? You be the judge. One of the fun (or, yes, extremely infuriating) things about Vanity Fair is that it's full of mysteries and crimes that remain unsolved. We start out rooting for Becky to keep putting one over on the dolts and jerks she is surrounded by. Slowly though, she is transformed from a plucky up-by-her-own-bootstraps orphan to a horridly scheming liar. As we rip off our "Team Becky" shirts, we are forced to wonder why Thackeray never actually reveals whether she is guilty or innocent of the crimes that cause her reputation's fiery crash. Sure, she is constantly stealing from her creditors, letting Rawdon's professional gambling fleece her friends, and pulling financial con jobs, but somehow the narrator makes these sound like comical shenanigans rather than nefarious evil. There seem to be two things that really do Becky in: first, the accusation that she sleeps with Lord Steyne in exchange for his money and social standing; and second, that she makes Jos take out an insurance policy on his life and then murders him. These are some pretty bad things if she did them, but no definitive evidence is ever presented, and the narrator doesn't tell us the ultimate truth. So why do we end up feeling so dirty at the end of the novel for having sided with Becky at first? Why does the narrator's allegiance shift from giving Becky credit where it's due (she is always shown to be pleasant, up to doing hard work when necessary, smart, funny, and unflaggingly optimistic) to declaring her to be a vicious and disgusting monster? We'll throw out one possibility. Stealing, cheating, and even financially motivated murder are crimes of circumstance. As the narrator always takes pains to point out, Becky is poor and needs to provide for herself and her future, by hook or by crook. Whatever she has to do toward this end is somewhat understandable, especially when her options as a woman are so limited. But there is one thing Becky is clearly guilty of. She neglects her child and is almost entirely non-maternal. This is a crime of her inmost nature. It has nothing to do with the accident of her low birth and everything to do with her failure as a human being. Think about it – how different would the novel have been if Becky was exactly the same but also fiercely devoted to little Rawdon Jr.? This novel is totally fixated on the many different kinds of lies everyone must tell themselves and each other just to get through the day: Really, you name the lie, the novel has got it in spades. With everyone swimming in this haze of untruth, the only character who does seem to be able to cut through the bull is Becky. She often has moments of speaking truth to power. She tells off Miss Pinkerton by brushing aside euphemisms and describing their power relationship exactly. She calls George Osborne out on his patronizing and condescending ways, forcing him to treat her politely. She's able to bargain with Rawdon's creditors because she's not ashamed of his debts and can thus argue for an effective settlement of pennies on the pound. At the same time, maybe because she is so good at seeing through social mores, Becky is one heck of an actress. And we're not just talking about her command performance in charades. For one, she is an incredible mimic, using her parodic gifts to entertain Miss Crawley and Lord Steyne. For another, almost everywhere she goes, she puts on an infallible charm offensive. Finally, she is a highly gifted storyteller, if only when spinning her own version of her story. But then again, aren't we reading a version of her story too? The only character in the novel that can even compete with her is the narrator himself. And even he can't get out in front of the plot to fill in the details of her sex life and potential murderousness. On top of everything else (hey, it's a long novel, lots of stuff in there), Becky is the ultimate sex symbol. She represents the promise of desire fulfilled for the men around her without seeming to have any desire herself. Think about her effect on pretty much every man she comes across. Jos wants her, though he's too shy to go for it. Sir Pitt wants her and tries to marry her. Pitt wants her and lets her get in the way of his marriage. Rawdon wants her, marries her, and keeps on wanting her. George is ready to have an affair with her two months into his marriage to Amelia. General Tufto is obsessed to the point of making himself ridiculous (well, even more ridiculous than he already is). Lord Steyne? Um, yeah. The only guy who finds her kind of repellent is Dobbin. This is also pretty telling. He is a total oddball who finds himself out of place in the surrounding society. He doesn't fall prey to Becky because her ability to exploit the rules of mainstream Victorian heterosexuality, to act the part of the most seductive woman in the room, don't work on someone who doesn't get how the room actually works. Dobbin is the exception that proves the rule. We know this because sometimes Thackeray is explicit about how Becky does her thing. Remember the bit with the cigar? First she smokes one of Rawdon's, and he gets all...um...worked up. Then she does the same thing to George because she remembers how well it worked the first time.
Grendel's mother, another demonic descendant of Cain, attempts to avenge her son's death by attacking Heorot Hall. Although she manages to kill one man, she is alarmed by the strength and prowess of the Geatish warriors, and retreats to her lair, a cave underneath a lake filled with sea monsters. Beowulf follows her to her lair and beheads her with a sword that he finds there. Although she isn't nearly as strong as her man-eating son, Grendel's mother fights like an Amazon warrior, and Beowulf has a tough time defeating her.
We're lumping these two Richie Richs together because in Ragtime they go together like salt and pepper… or maybe something fancier, like beluga caviar and truffle oil? Gucci and Dom Perignon? Money and even more money? Morgan and Ford are two of the richest men in America, and they symbolize wealth and power. Though they're two very different men, both believe in reincarnation. Aww, they have something in common. They're destined to become besties. Morgan specifically believes that they are part of a class of men born into every era to run the world, while Ford's beliefs are more basic. When they meet for lunch, Ford tells Morgan he shouldn't have spent so much money on stuff and that he learned about reincarnation from a little book that cost him "just twenty-five cents" (20.14). Their interest in reincarnation underscores how death-obsessed they are. Their empires and unimaginable riches can't hold off the inevitable bucket-kicking. Morgan goes to Egypt in order to (seriously) contemplate being buried inside a pyramid. Ford conceives his assembly line because he's spent so much time studying the workings of slaughterhouses. Talk about morbidity. Both of these characters existed in real life. Henry Ford was the notoriously bigoted car magnate, and J.P. Morgan was a famous financier, best known today as the J.P. Morgan in J.P. Morgan &amp; Co.
Lady Marchmain seems perfectly nice, doesn’t she? She’s pious, refined, concerned for her children’s well-being, and dealing quite wonderfully with the fact that her husband left her for another woman. So explain these reactions to her:Anthony: "She […] keeps a small gang of enslaved and emaciated prisoners for her exclusive enjoyment. She sucks their blood. You can see the tooth-marks all over Adrian Porson's shoulders when he is bathing. […] He's bled dry; there's nothing left of him. There are five or six others of all ages and sexes, like wraiths following her round. They never escape once she's had her teeth into them. It is witchcraft. There's no other explanation."Sebastian: "She really was a femme fatale, wasn’t she. She killed at a touch."Anthony, again: "What a poor time that woman is having! It only shows there’s some justice in life."Is any of this true? Are any of these rather extreme descriptions justified? We can answer only through Charles’s eyes, but let’s take a look anyway. As he spends more and more time with Lady Marchmain, Charles does indeed confirm her manipulative nature. "One was never summoned for a little talk," he says of her, "or consciously led to it; it merely happened, when she wished to speak intimately, that one found oneself alone with her." Even her requests for help in handling Sebastian are laced with this apparently super-human ability to manipulate: "she took hold of her subject in a feminine, flirtatious way, circling, approaching, retreating, feinting; she hovered over it like a butterfly; she played ‘grandmother's steps’ with it, getting nearer the real point imperceptibly while one's back was turned, standing rooted when she was observed" (1.5.291).Still, Charles doesn’t write her off and officially side with Sebastian until he reads her little book on Uncle Ned. What’s up with that book, anyway? Lady Marchmain says of her dead brothers, "They were three splendid men; Ned was the best of them. He was the last to be killed, and when the telegram came, as I knew it would come, I thought: 'Now it's my son's turn to do what Ned can never do now.' I was alone then. He was just going to Eton. If you read Ned's book you'll understand." It’s not exactly clear from the text, but Lady Marchmain is trying to get Sebastian to take over the male responsibilities of her own family, since Ned (her last living brother) has now kicked the bucket. This isn’t at all a happy arrangement for the carefree and youthful Sebastian, who wants only to be happy. Charles finally understands her intentions after reading the book on the train, which explains this little exchange:"Did you have a 'little talk' with Mummy?""Yes." "Have you gone over to her side?" The day before I would have said: "There aren't two sides"; that day I said, "No, I'm with you, Sebastian contra mundum."OK, OK, so the woman is manipulative. But does that really explain all the hostility we see? No, not completely. Fortunately, Cordelia comes to our analytical rescue one again. (Boy, is she handy or what?): "When people wanted to hate God they hated mummy." This makes particular sense for Lady Marchmain’s children, who had Catholicism imposed upon them by their mother (and certainly not their father, who converted himself just to keep her happy). Since holiness means suffering, and Lady Marchmain is responsible for her children’s obligation to holiness, it follows that she is responsible for their suffering. We can start to see why Sebastian or even Julia so resent her. As for Lord Marchmain, that’s an entirely different story – and a different "Character Analysis."
Until he comes home to Brideshead Castle to die, most of what Charles (and we) knows about Lord Marchmain is second hand. It starts with Anthony early in the novel, who tells the story of Marchmain’s affair and his current exile from his wife and in fact all of England. Interestingly, Anthony takes Lord Marchmain’s side and condemns Lady Marchmain.Next we know, Sebastian explains that he’s the only of his siblings maintaining any sort of real relationship with his father. Sebastian, too, sympathizes with his father, so for the second time Charles is inclined to side with Lord Marchmain and against Lady Marchmain. When Charles finally gets to meet the man, we once again get more information from a second-hand source than we do from our first-person narrator's observations. This time, it’s Cara.Cara’s long description of Lord Marchmain’s rocky relationship with his wife is there for a reason: it’s one more step in Charles’s education regarding love. It also sets up a parallel for us between Lord Marchmain’s marriage to Lady Marchmain and Charles’s "romantic friendship" with Sebastian. Both are first loves, as Cara says. Both are immature, and both act as forerunners to a later, more mature relationship. In the case of Lord Marchmain, this second love is presumably what he has with Cara.Lord Marchmain is also a general parallel for Sebastian and his bad habits, as Lady Marchmain points out in the following passage:"You see, it's all happened before. […] I mean years ago. I've been through it all before with someone else whom I loved. Well, you must know what I mean – with his father. He used to be drunk in just that way. […] But the running away – he ran away, too, you know. It was as you said just now, he was ashamed of being unhappy. Both of them unhappy, ashamed and running away. It's too pitiful." Of course, Sebastian’s character and decisions are very, very different from his father. He chooses suffering to be closer to God while Lord Marchmain essentially renounces his faith by moving to Italy and living with his mistress. That Lady Marchmain can’t recognize these differences only suggests how little she understands her son.Speaking of faith, let’s look at what happens when Lord Marchmain comes back into the picture at the end of Book Two. The first thing that Charles notices is that, actually, this guy is new kind of a jerk. "I had always been aware of a frame of malevolence under his urbanity," he says, "now it protruded like his own sharp bones through his skin." But it doesn’t take long to figure out that Lord Marchmain’s new personality is essentially just a reaction to his illness. He really, really doesn’t want to die.Now let’s check out that death scene. By this point, Charles has tirelessly argued with Bridey and Cordelia and even Julia against having a priest come to perform the Last Sacrament on Lord Marchmain. "No one could have made it clearer," Charles says, "all his life, what he thought of religion. They’ll come now, when his mind’s wandering and he hasn’t the strength to resist." Charles gets pretty worked up over the issue, and it is in fact the final dividing factor that destroys he and Julia’s relationship. Charles comments that "the fate of more souls than one [is] at issue," and indeed this turns out to be true. Lord Marchmain decides not only if he will or will not see a priest, but also the heir to Brideshead and, in a way, whether or not Charles and Julia will stay together.What does Lord Marchmain have to do with Charles and Julia’s relationship? Plenty. When he – who all his life has opposed religion – manages to make the sign of his cross and willingly receive the Last Sacrament on his death bed, he brings Julia back to God. It is right after this touching scene that Julia decides she needs to accept God’s love and break it off with Charles. She was inspired by her father’s actions.The other issue at hand is Charles’s own conversion to Catholicism, which we talk about in "What’s Up With the Ending?" The first time we see a shift in Charles’s attitude toward Catholicism moments before Lord Marchmain’s death, when they wait for him to accept or refuse the Last Sacrament. "I suddenly felt the longing for a sign," explains Charles, and after he sees it suddenly remembers a scene from the Bible. These are the first stirrings of what will ultimately lead to his position as a Catholic by the time he’s in the army in the 1940s.
Pluto is fine specimen of a cat. All black, large, fuzzy, and "and sagacious to an astonishing degree" (4). (Sagacious is a cool word to know. It means extremely wise, intelligent, and perceptive.) Over the years Pluto moves from a pampered pet to an abused beast. He is blinded and ultimately murdered by his owner. The narrator might have us believe that he is actually a witch in disguise (see the "Character Analysis" for the narrator's wife more), transforming from witch to Pluto, to the second black cat. To be fair, we gave the second cat his own "Character Analysis," so be sure to check that out. For now, we are focusing on the cat the narrator calls Pluto.Some critics argue that Pluto is a cat, and only a cat. Others think he's a symbol or allegory for other things. Others think he's both. Since we are all about open reading, we'll go with the third option. Poe had pets of his own, and is suspected to have been an animal lover. At a most basic level, the story seems designed to invite sympathy for animals, and raise awareness of animal abuse. Since you probably don't need a lecture on being nice to cats, we'll focus on a few allegorical and symbolic possibilities.
Andy is a chilling villain. He's a high school senior who seems to have a long history of sexually assaulting girls. If the response to Melinda's anti-Andy graffiti is proof, Melinda is not the first girl raped by Andy, nor is she the first to keep quiet about the attack. Andy is basically a flat character. We see him as a grim, shadowy monster scaring the heck out of Melinda. We know his family is wealthy, that he's good looking, and that he's very charming. We don't know why he does what he does. Andy is important to the novel as an antagonist, but the focus of Speak is Melinda, like the focus of Alice Sebold's The Lovely Bones is Susie Salmon, another teenage victim of rape. In Speak, as well as in The Lovely Bones, the experience of the victim is more important than trying to understand the motives of the attacker.
Vladimir Harkonnen is the Baron of Geidi Prime. At first, he wants nothing more than to spring Duke Leto off his mortal coil, but afterward, he sets his sights toward securing the Imperium throne for his nephew, Feyd-Rautha.
Leader of the House of Harkonnen. The baron is the mortal enemy of the House of Atreides. The baron is very fat, and his bulk is supported by electronic suspenders.
Mrs. Wormwood, Matilda's mother, is one of the villains in the books, but she pales in comparison with the two other villains: Matilda's father and the Trunchbull. Mrs. Wormwood is a bad mother, but she's not as bad a parent as Mr. Wormwood is. Don't get us wrong. She's awful. But her worst quality is that she just doesn't give a hoot about her own daughter. As Matilda tells us, "'She [my mother] doesn't really care what I do'" (1.41). She ignores her children, doesn't support them, and sides with Mr. Wormwood whenever she has to pick a side. Not that she cares. She's way more interested in playing Bingo and watching nighttime soap operas than she is in spending time with her family or developing a career of her own. She doesn't even really cook for her family. Some nights they have TV dinners, premade food, and other nights they have takeout fish-and-chips. Talk about lazy parenting. It's worth noticing that while Matilda says she's going to play pranks on both her parents whenever they behave badly to her, the pranks we read about in this book mostly target her father. The ghost-parrot scares everybody, of course, but it makes Mr. Wormwood look the worst, not Mrs. Wormwood. It's Mr. Wormwood who ends up with a hat stuck to his head, and Mr. Wormwood who gets his hair dyed the wrong color. Instead, Mrs. Wormwood suffers by association. It makes her sad that her husband looks silly, and that's about the deepest thought she has in the book, but Matilda never targets her by herself. And Mrs. Wormwood doesn't deserve it as much as Mr. Wormwood. She plays a much less active role in terrorizing her daughter. She deserves some punishment, though. She doesn't step up and defend Matilda when Mr. Wormwood bothers her, and she doesn't help her daughter develop her awesome mind. That's what makes Mrs. Wormwood a villain—she just can't bring herself to care about her own daughter.
Mrs. Wormwood, Matilda's mother, is one of the villains in the books, but she pales in comparison with the two other villains: Matilda's father and the Trunchbull. Mrs. Wormwood is a bad mother, but she's not as bad a parent as Mr. Wormwood is. Don't get us wrong. She's awful. But her worst quality is that she just doesn't give a hoot about her own daughter. As Matilda tells us, "'She [my mother] doesn't really care what I do'" (1.41). She ignores her children, doesn't support them, and sides with Mr. Wormwood whenever she has to pick a side. Not that she cares. She's way more interested in playing Bingo and watching nighttime soap operas than she is in spending time with her family or developing a career of her own. She doesn't even really cook for her family. Some nights they have TV dinners, premade food, and other nights they have takeout fish-and-chips. Talk about lazy parenting. It's worth noticing that while Matilda says she's going to play pranks on both her parents whenever they behave badly to her, the pranks we read about in this book mostly target her father. The ghost-parrot scares everybody, of course, but it makes Mr. Wormwood look the worst, not Mrs. Wormwood. It's Mr. Wormwood who ends up with a hat stuck to his head, and Mr. Wormwood who gets his hair dyed the wrong color. Instead, Mrs. Wormwood suffers by association. It makes her sad that her husband looks silly, and that's about the deepest thought she has in the book, but Matilda never targets her by herself. And Mrs. Wormwood doesn't deserve it as much as Mr. Wormwood. She plays a much less active role in terrorizing her daughter. She deserves some punishment, though. She doesn't step up and defend Matilda when Mr. Wormwood bothers her, and she doesn't help her daughter develop her awesome mind. That's what makes Mrs. Wormwood a villain—she just can't bring herself to care about her own daughter.
You couldn't ask for a clearer portrait of the All-American Girl than Amy Elliott Dunne. She's funny, smart, has a great personality, and in the appearance department, she's a total number one stunner. Oh, and did we mention that she was the inspiration for the popular (fictional) children's book series Amazing Amy? That's right, Shmoopsters—when it comes to finding your dream girl, Amy fits the bill. At least she seems to. In reality though, when Electric Light Orchestra wrote "Evil Woman", they probably had Amy in mind. She might seem like a good girl, but she's actually a master manipulator, an expert at mind games, and always gets her way—no matter what.
If there's any good in Nick, it comes from Go and his mom. If there's anything bad, nasty, or unrespectable about him—and you know there is—it comes from his dad. After a childhood filled with emotional and mental abuse, it's not surprising that Nick is relatively stoic as his dad deteriorates from Alzheimer's. He never even speaks his name, a clear indication that he wishes he could just erase his father's negative influence on their family. In fact, the only way we even know his name is through Amy's diary entries. The thing that's really hard to understand about Bill is that even though he hates women, he still got married. "I don't think my father's issue was with my mother in particular," Nick explains. "He just didn't like women. He thought they were stupid, inconsequential, irritating" (9.28). Lucky Maureen, right? Not so much. Nick's dad's misogyny extends to all women, upon whom he bestows the title of "dumb b****" (9.28) regardless of their intelligence or capabilities. The sad thing is that this includes his wife and daughter. "I doubt that my sister will ever marry," Nick says. "If she's sad or upset, she needs to be alone—she fears a man dismissing her womanly tears" (9.32). Go's not the only one afraid of crying because of Bill Dunne—Nick is too. Nick's father has a bizarre ability to accurately comment on situations, even though he's unaware he's doing as much. In Amy's account of her housewarming party, Bill forgets who she is and repeatedly mutters, "'She doesn't belong here'" (16.35)—which is unwittingly spot-on since Amy really doesn't feel like she belongs in Missouri. And later, when Bill escapes to Nick's house after Nick discovers Amy's framing him, he berates Amy and says "'It's not over […] She doesn't get to have a say'" (49.57). The accuracy with which he describes their situation leaves Nick totally stunned. Want to know more about how Bill's character impacts Nick? Head on over to Nick's character analysis and check it out.
Nick and his sister, Margo (better known as Go), are definitely the Luke Skywalker and Princess Leia of Gone Girl, a twintastic team working together to navigate the dangerous universe under Darth Amy's control. Go knows Nick better than anyone else because, according to him, she's the only person who's ever seen who he really is. "Go is truly the one person in the entire world I am totally myself with," Nick explains. "I don't feel the need to explain my actions to her. I don't clarify, I don't doubt, I don't worry. I don't tell her everything, not anymore, but I tell her more than anyone else by far" (3.4). In other words, Go is Nick's go-to gal (pun totally intended). It's easy to understand why anyone would be comfortable with Go. She makes hilarious dirty jokes and enjoys tossing them at Nick "like a grenade" (3.53); she tells "outrageously mundane, endless stories" (17.170) for kicks and giggles; she wears boxer shorts and a Butthole Surfers t-shirt to bed (49.4); and she's co-owner of a bar called The Bar. Seriously—who wouldn't want to be this woman's twin? She's the only character in this book without any sort of pretense. What you see is what you get with Go, and it's awesome. Despite the growing suspicion toward her brother, Go remains faithful to Nick throughout the investigation. Nonetheless, the perfect, unwavering trust they've shared probably since the womb is a casualty of Amy's behavior. The momentary doubt Go feels about Nick's innocence leaves a single scar on their relationship. Nick says: We were growing sick of each other, something I never thought could happen […] Those ten seconds just a week ago when I'd opened the door of the woodshed, expecting Go to read my mind as always, and what Go had read was that I'd killed my wife: I couldn't get over that. (49.32) Nick isn't the only one who feels let down, though, and we get a clear sense at the end of the book that, momentary doubt of his innocence aside, Go will never feel the same about her brother. When Nick tells her about Amy's pregnancy—the real one—she explodes at him with a profanity-laden explanation of how staying with Amy and having a family will be his undoing. "'This breaks my heart,'" she says once she calms down a little. "'Things weren't supposed to turn out this way'" (63.36). And when she says this, of course, we believe her.
Misunderstood man or malicious murderer? Abused child or abusive husband? Loving spouse or lonely adulterer? Throughout Gone Girl, Nick Dunne appears to be many things. Some of them we know to be true, some of them we don't—the surprises, shocking revelations, and personality twists are all part of the fun of seeing his character unfold.
Misunderstood man or malicious murderer? Abused child or abusive husband? Loving spouse or lonely adulterer? Throughout Gone Girl, Nick Dunne appears to be many things. Some of them we know to be true, some of them we don't—the surprises, shocking revelations, and personality twists are all part of the fun of seeing his character unfold.
Misunderstood man or malicious murderer? Abused child or abusive husband? Loving spouse or lonely adulterer? Throughout Gone Girl, Nick Dunne appears to be many things. Some of them we know to be true, some of them we don't—the surprises, shocking revelations, and personality twists are all part of the fun of seeing his character unfold.
Misunderstood man or malicious murderer? Abused child or abusive husband? Loving spouse or lonely adulterer? Throughout Gone Girl, Nick Dunne appears to be many things. Some of them we know to be true, some of them we don't—the surprises, shocking revelations, and personality twists are all part of the fun of seeing his character unfold.
Dracula He is the vampire who has been "Un-Dead" for several hundred years and keeps his vitality by sucking blood from live victims. He is the Transylvanian Count for whom the book is named. Despite the fact that he is actually seen on only a few of the approximately four hundred pages of the novel, his presence constantly pervades the entire work; of note is the fact that his desire to move from the barren and desolate Transylvania, which is sparsely populated, to the more populous England, is the initiating point of the novel since someone from England must make the trip to Castle Dracula to complete the transactions. In appearance, Count Dracula is described as being a "tall old man, clean shaven, save for a long white mustache and clad in black from head to foot, without a single speck of color about him anywhere." Contrary to popular understanding, Stoker has his Dracula sporting a large, bushy Victorian mustache and having a profuse head of dense, curly hair, massive eyebrows, and peculiarly sharp white teeth, especially the canine teeth. Dracula also possesses astonishing vitality, as is witnessed every time that he appears in a difficult situation.
Dracula He is the vampire who has been "Un-Dead" for several hundred years and keeps his vitality by sucking blood from live victims. He is the Transylvanian Count for whom the book is named. Despite the fact that he is actually seen on only a few of the approximately four hundred pages of the novel, his presence constantly pervades the entire work; of note is the fact that his desire to move from the barren and desolate Transylvania, which is sparsely populated, to the more populous England, is the initiating point of the novel since someone from England must make the trip to Castle Dracula to complete the transactions. In appearance, Count Dracula is described as being a "tall old man, clean shaven, save for a long white mustache and clad in black from head to foot, without a single speck of color about him anywhere." Contrary to popular understanding, Stoker has his Dracula sporting a large, bushy Victorian mustache and having a profuse head of dense, curly hair, massive eyebrows, and peculiarly sharp white teeth, especially the canine teeth. Dracula also possesses astonishing vitality, as is witnessed every time that he appears in a difficult situation.
Dracula He is the vampire who has been "Un-Dead" for several hundred years and keeps his vitality by sucking blood from live victims. He is the Transylvanian Count for whom the book is named. Despite the fact that he is actually seen on only a few of the approximately four hundred pages of the novel, his presence constantly pervades the entire work; of note is the fact that his desire to move from the barren and desolate Transylvania, which is sparsely populated, to the more populous England, is the initiating point of the novel since someone from England must make the trip to Castle Dracula to complete the transactions. In appearance, Count Dracula is described as being a "tall old man, clean shaven, save for a long white mustache and clad in black from head to foot, without a single speck of color about him anywhere." Contrary to popular understanding, Stoker has his Dracula sporting a large, bushy Victorian mustache and having a profuse head of dense, curly hair, massive eyebrows, and peculiarly sharp white teeth, especially the canine teeth. Dracula also possesses astonishing vitality, as is witnessed every time that he appears in a difficult situation.
Dracula He is the vampire who has been "Un-Dead" for several hundred years and keeps his vitality by sucking blood from live victims. He is the Transylvanian Count for whom the book is named. Despite the fact that he is actually seen on only a few of the approximately four hundred pages of the novel, his presence constantly pervades the entire work; of note is the fact that his desire to move from the barren and desolate Transylvania, which is sparsely populated, to the more populous England, is the initiating point of the novel since someone from England must make the trip to Castle Dracula to complete the transactions. In appearance, Count Dracula is described as being a "tall old man, clean shaven, save for a long white mustache and clad in black from head to foot, without a single speck of color about him anywhere." Contrary to popular understanding, Stoker has his Dracula sporting a large, bushy Victorian mustache and having a profuse head of dense, curly hair, massive eyebrows, and peculiarly sharp white teeth, especially the canine teeth. Dracula also possesses astonishing vitality, as is witnessed every time that he appears in a difficult situation.
Although he's the star of the show (and the titular character—Stoker didn't name this book Harker), we really don't get a lot of intel into our main man. Dracula is more of a shadowy presence in this novel, always threatening the main characters, but rarely making himself visible. He's usually just off-stage, just ahead of the good guys. Does that mean he's incredibly clever? Van Helsing doesn't think so: He's done some research and knows that Count Dracula was a great scholar in his own day—but that was a long time ago. Since becoming a vampire, he's lost some of his intellectual skills and hasn't learned a whole lot. And being smart in the Middle Ages doesn't put you much ahead of the curve in 1897. Nobody told Dracula the ol' "use it or lose it" rule... at least according to Van Helsing's narrow definition of intelligence.Seriously, though, why does Van Helsing say that Dracula has a "child-brain" (23.2-4)? Dracula has been around for centuries, after all. He can turn into a bat and a wolf, and can control the weather. He's seen a thing or two. Just because he doesn't know about fancy new technology doesn't mean he's got a "child-brain." All he ever wanted was to hang out in London, maybe catch a show, and suck the blood out of the teeming mass of people. It's such a huge city, no one would miss a few people.Partly because we know so little about Dracula from the novel, many later filmmakers have tried to develop his character based on the few tidbits of information we do know about him. For example, when Dracula tells the vampire brides to lay off Jonathan Harker in Chapter 3, he comforts them by saying, "Yes, I too can love; you yourselves can tell it from the past. Is it not so?" (3.35). What, exactly, is Dracula referring to? Did he, at one point, have a real romantic relationship with one or all of the vampire brides? During his life, was one of them his wife or lover? Does he have a dark history? Some kind of tragic love affair in his past? Too bad: Stoker ain't going to tell you. The novel doesn't give us answers to these questions, but some later films try to develop them (see, for example, the 1992 film Bram Stoker's Dracula, directed by Francis Ford Coppola).
Although he's the star of the show (and the titular character—Stoker didn't name this book Harker), we really don't get a lot of intel into our main man. Dracula is more of a shadowy presence in this novel, always threatening the main characters, but rarely making himself visible. He's usually just off-stage, just ahead of the good guys. Does that mean he's incredibly clever? Van Helsing doesn't think so: He's done some research and knows that Count Dracula was a great scholar in his own day—but that was a long time ago. Since becoming a vampire, he's lost some of his intellectual skills and hasn't learned a whole lot. And being smart in the Middle Ages doesn't put you much ahead of the curve in 1897. Nobody told Dracula the ol' "use it or lose it" rule... at least according to Van Helsing's narrow definition of intelligence.Seriously, though, why does Van Helsing say that Dracula has a "child-brain" (23.2-4)? Dracula has been around for centuries, after all. He can turn into a bat and a wolf, and can control the weather. He's seen a thing or two. Just because he doesn't know about fancy new technology doesn't mean he's got a "child-brain." All he ever wanted was to hang out in London, maybe catch a show, and suck the blood out of the teeming mass of people. It's such a huge city, no one would miss a few people.Partly because we know so little about Dracula from the novel, many later filmmakers have tried to develop his character based on the few tidbits of information we do know about him. For example, when Dracula tells the vampire brides to lay off Jonathan Harker in Chapter 3, he comforts them by saying, "Yes, I too can love; you yourselves can tell it from the past. Is it not so?" (3.35). What, exactly, is Dracula referring to? Did he, at one point, have a real romantic relationship with one or all of the vampire brides? During his life, was one of them his wife or lover? Does he have a dark history? Some kind of tragic love affair in his past? Too bad: Stoker ain't going to tell you. The novel doesn't give us answers to these questions, but some later films try to develop them (see, for example, the 1992 film Bram Stoker's Dracula, directed by Francis Ford Coppola).
Although he's the star of the show (and the titular character—Stoker didn't name this book Harker), we really don't get a lot of intel into our main man. Dracula is more of a shadowy presence in this novel, always threatening the main characters, but rarely making himself visible. He's usually just off-stage, just ahead of the good guys. Does that mean he's incredibly clever? Van Helsing doesn't think so: He's done some research and knows that Count Dracula was a great scholar in his own day—but that was a long time ago. Since becoming a vampire, he's lost some of his intellectual skills and hasn't learned a whole lot. And being smart in the Middle Ages doesn't put you much ahead of the curve in 1897. Nobody told Dracula the ol' "use it or lose it" rule... at least according to Van Helsing's narrow definition of intelligence.Seriously, though, why does Van Helsing say that Dracula has a "child-brain" (23.2-4)? Dracula has been around for centuries, after all. He can turn into a bat and a wolf, and can control the weather. He's seen a thing or two. Just because he doesn't know about fancy new technology doesn't mean he's got a "child-brain." All he ever wanted was to hang out in London, maybe catch a show, and suck the blood out of the teeming mass of people. It's such a huge city, no one would miss a few people.Partly because we know so little about Dracula from the novel, many later filmmakers have tried to develop his character based on the few tidbits of information we do know about him. For example, when Dracula tells the vampire brides to lay off Jonathan Harker in Chapter 3, he comforts them by saying, "Yes, I too can love; you yourselves can tell it from the past. Is it not so?" (3.35). What, exactly, is Dracula referring to? Did he, at one point, have a real romantic relationship with one or all of the vampire brides? During his life, was one of them his wife or lover? Does he have a dark history? Some kind of tragic love affair in his past? Too bad: Stoker ain't going to tell you. The novel doesn't give us answers to these questions, but some later films try to develop them (see, for example, the 1992 film Bram Stoker's Dracula, directed by Francis Ford Coppola).
Although he's the star of the show (and the titular character—Stoker didn't name this book Harker), we really don't get a lot of intel into our main man. Dracula is more of a shadowy presence in this novel, always threatening the main characters, but rarely making himself visible. He's usually just off-stage, just ahead of the good guys. Does that mean he's incredibly clever? Van Helsing doesn't think so: He's done some research and knows that Count Dracula was a great scholar in his own day—but that was a long time ago. Since becoming a vampire, he's lost some of his intellectual skills and hasn't learned a whole lot. And being smart in the Middle Ages doesn't put you much ahead of the curve in 1897. Nobody told Dracula the ol' "use it or lose it" rule... at least according to Van Helsing's narrow definition of intelligence.Seriously, though, why does Van Helsing say that Dracula has a "child-brain" (23.2-4)? Dracula has been around for centuries, after all. He can turn into a bat and a wolf, and can control the weather. He's seen a thing or two. Just because he doesn't know about fancy new technology doesn't mean he's got a "child-brain." All he ever wanted was to hang out in London, maybe catch a show, and suck the blood out of the teeming mass of people. It's such a huge city, no one would miss a few people.Partly because we know so little about Dracula from the novel, many later filmmakers have tried to develop his character based on the few tidbits of information we do know about him. For example, when Dracula tells the vampire brides to lay off Jonathan Harker in Chapter 3, he comforts them by saying, "Yes, I too can love; you yourselves can tell it from the past. Is it not so?" (3.35). What, exactly, is Dracula referring to? Did he, at one point, have a real romantic relationship with one or all of the vampire brides? During his life, was one of them his wife or lover? Does he have a dark history? Some kind of tragic love affair in his past? Too bad: Stoker ain't going to tell you. The novel doesn't give us answers to these questions, but some later films try to develop them (see, for example, the 1992 film Bram Stoker's Dracula, directed by Francis Ford Coppola).
A centuries-old vampire and Transylvanian nobleman, Count Dracula inhabits a crumbling castle in the Carpathian Mountains. Beneath a veneer of aristocratic charm, the count possesses a dark and evil soul. He can assume the form of an animal, control the weather, and he is stronger than twenty men. His powers are limited, however—for instance, he cannot enter a victim’s home unless invited, cannot cross water unless carried, and is rendered powerless by daylight.
A centuries-old vampire and Transylvanian nobleman, Count Dracula inhabits a crumbling castle in the Carpathian Mountains. Beneath a veneer of aristocratic charm, the count possesses a dark and evil soul. He can assume the form of an animal, control the weather, and he is stronger than twenty men. His powers are limited, however—for instance, he cannot enter a victim’s home unless invited, cannot cross water unless carried, and is rendered powerless by daylight.
A centuries-old vampire and Transylvanian nobleman, Count Dracula inhabits a crumbling castle in the Carpathian Mountains. Beneath a veneer of aristocratic charm, the count possesses a dark and evil soul. He can assume the form of an animal, control the weather, and he is stronger than twenty men. His powers are limited, however—for instance, he cannot enter a victim’s home unless invited, cannot cross water unless carried, and is rendered powerless by daylight.
A centuries-old vampire and Transylvanian nobleman, Count Dracula inhabits a crumbling castle in the Carpathian Mountains. Beneath a veneer of aristocratic charm, the count possesses a dark and evil soul. He can assume the form of an animal, control the weather, and he is stronger than twenty men. His powers are limited, however—for instance, he cannot enter a victim’s home unless invited, cannot cross water unless carried, and is rendered powerless by daylight.
Poor monster. He has a face not even a mother/ mad scientist could love… but at least it comes with a heart of gold. Or does it? We'd like to give him the benefit of the doubt—but, when it comes down to it, we'd be pulling out the mace and pressing the panic button on our cellphone if we saw him in a dark alley. So, let's start with the bad.
If you ask us, it's no coincidence that people get Mr. Frankenstein and his monster mixed up. He may have conquered the secrets of nature, but he's a big dunce when it comes to, oh, everything else. So, how did this kid messing around with the nineteenth-century equivalent of a chemistry set end up on a suicide mission over frozen Artic wastes?
The doomed protagonist and narrator of the main portion of the story. Studying in Ingolstadt, Victor discovers the secret of life and creates an intelligent but grotesque monster, from whom he recoils in horror. Victor keeps his creation of the monster a secret, feeling increasingly guilty and ashamed as he realizes how helpless he is to prevent the monster from ruining his life and the lives of others.
William is Frankenstein's younger brother, and, well, he's not the brightest crayon in the box. Nor is he the most considerate, the kindest, or the most interesting. He insists that the monster wants to "eat [him] and tear [him] to pieces," and then, hilariously, threatens to tell his dad about him (16.27). In fact, he's pretty much the embodiment of all the shallow negativity of the other characters in the story. Fitting, then, that he's extremely attractive: He is very tall of his age, with sweet laughing blue eyes, dark eyelashes, and curling hair. When he smiles, two little dimples appear on each cheek, which are rosy with health. He has already had one or two little WIVES, but Louisa Biron is his favourite, a pretty little girl of five years of age. (6.8) Hmm. It seems that, just like Frankenstein, William already makes his value judgments based on looks. Only—in the case of the monster, he's actually right to do so. Does William's unfortunate experience prove that prejudice against ugliness is innate? Or does it just prove that even a six year old can be hopelessly prejudiced?
Victor’s youngest brother and the darling of the Frankenstein family. The monster strangles William in the woods outside Geneva in order to hurt Victor for abandoning him. William’s death deeply saddens Victor and burdens him with tremendous guilt about having created the monster.
The eight-foot-tall, hideously ugly creation of Victor Frankenstein. Intelligent and sensitive, the monster attempts to integrate himself into human social patterns, but all who see him shun him. His feeling of abandonment compels him to seek revenge against his creator.
Grendel's mother doesn't have all that much going for her. She's not good looking, she's not a sparkling conversationalist, and she's not a very good cook. She... okay, we'll be real: she smells of fish, she has nasty amounts of body hair, and she has a tendency to suffocate her son when she gives him hugs. But like all the other characters in this novel, Mama Grendel is an intricate study in psychology. Here again, Gardner plays with types and categories: this lady is a mother (and does all things a mother would do), but she's also a monster. Unlike Grendel, she is stereotypically monstrous—she doesn't seem to have language or higher thought patterns. She seems to belong squarely in the animal world. And yet...
The protagonist and narrator of the novel. A great, bearlike monster, Grendel is the first of three monsters defeated by the Geatish hero Beowulf in the sixth-century poem In he is a lonely creature who seeks an understanding of the seemingly meaningless world around him. As an outsider, Grendel observes and provides commentary on the human civilization he battles.
A foul, wretched being, and Grendel’s only apparent family member. Grendel’s mother lives with Grendel in a cave in a vast underground realm. She desperately tries to protect Grendel from the humans and his fate. She has either forgotten or never knew how to speak, though at times her gibberish approaches coherent language.
Brown Because he once had a respectable background, he calls himself "Gentleman Brown." Now, however, he has become a pirate. By chance, he comes upriver to Patusan, hoping to raid the village for enough food and water to get his pirate crew to Madagascar.
Gentleman Brown is not, we repeat, not a gentleman. Point of fact: dude's a pirate. That doesn't exactly scream upstanding citizen. He stirs up ten kinds of trouble for our Jimmy. Yep, he ruins just about everything. Brown comes late to the Lord Jim party. He doesn't arrive on the scene until Chapter 37. But even though he missed h'ors d'oeuvres, dinner, and barely made dessert, the guy was late for a good reason. He's here to bring about the novel's action-packed conclusion. By the time Brown shows up, we have spent page after page sussing out who Jim is. Is he a coward? A hero? A bit of both? Gentleman Brown arrives just in time to give us one last glimpse into Jim's character. How does Brown do that? By acting as a foil for Jim. Let's compare the two. Like Jim, Brown is a total romantic. He is all about high seas adventure. We might think of him as a Jim sans moral compass. He gets his adventure kicks by pillaging and plundering, although in the end that does not actually get him very far: The world he had bullied for twenty years with fierce, aggressive disdain, had yielded him nothing in the way of material advantage [...] He was tired of his life, and not afraid of death. But this man, who would stake his existence on a whim with a bitter and jeering recklessness, stood in mortal fear of imprisonment. (38.3) He may be the most fearsome pirate around, but he has fears of his own (namely, prison), and his life has not been as rich as you might think. Brown lands on Patusan with the sense that the world owes him something. His reputation as a Seriously Bad Dude precedes him. His notoriety proves true, of course; no sooner does he arrive on Patusan than he immediately makes plans to do all kinds of piratey things. But he is quickly foiled by none other than Lord Jim. Realizing he can't defeat the powerful, popular Jim, Gentleman Brown opts for a parley. That's when things get interesting. In chatting with Jim, Brown spots an easy target for manipulation: When he asked Jim, with a sort of brusque despairing frankness, whether he himself – straight now – didn't understand that when "it came to saving one's life in the dark, one didn't care who else went – three, thirty, three hundred people" – it was as if a demon had been whispering advice in his ear. "I made him wince," boasted Brown to me. (42.1) Brown is one smart dude. He knows how to hit Jim where it hurts – his past. Even though he too has fears and soft spots, Brown out-manipulates Jim, which puts our hero in a tight spot. With the help of the dastardly Cornelius, Brown brings about Jim's downfall, which brings a swift end to the novel as well. In the end, each man kind of ends up with the death the other was destined for. Jim dies in a dramatic execution scene after a big battle – something Brown probably expected for himself. Brown dies disgraced, sick, and alone in a hospital while yammering on to Marlow, a fate Marlow once predicted for Jim.
Lord Jim A tall, powerfully built young man with piercing blue eyes and a deep voice. On his first assignment at sea, aboard the Patna, Jim abandons 800 Moslem pilgrims because he thinks that the ship is going to explode momentarily. Afterward, he is terribly ashamed and unable to live a normal life because he fears that his terrible cowardice will be revealed. It is only after Jim becomes the overseer of a trading post in the far-off Malay Islands that he is able to regain his self-esteem and his sense of honor. Patna
Oh Jim. We want to like you, we really do. After all, you are the star of the show, and the whole novel revolves around you and your story. But you make it so hard by mucking things up all the time. Plus, it can get pretty confusing for us readers to suss out just who you are. How are we supposed to know the real you, when this Marlow guy keeps meddling?
We get the shivers just thinking about the Warden. This scary lady is a descendent of Trout and Linda Walker, the original owners of Green Lake, and just like them, she's greedy, selfish, and has a one-track mind.
The Warden is the ultimate symbol of cruel authority at Camp Green Lake. She rewards only those who do what she wants and uses her power to threaten everyone else. She has hidden cameras that she uses to spy on the boys and nail polish with rattlesnake venom that she will use to scratch those who displease her. She is a descendent of Charles and Linda Walker and is making the boys dig holes in an attempt to dig up Kate Barlow's treasure.
John Lackland, son of Henry II and future king of England after the events of Ivanhoe, is a real historical figure. Like his brother, King Richard I, John has left a huge impression on British cultural memory. Unlike King Richard I, his reputation is not for bravery, strength, and chivalry. What John generally represents is weakness, cowardliness, and greed. You have to be a pretty crummy king to leave a bad taste in people's mouths over 800 years after your death. One reason for Prince John's enduringly bad popular image is thanks to books like Ivanhoe, which use him as a convenient villain. After all, Prince John did rebel against both his brother and father – so he had to be a rat, right? There was a lot of civil unrest in England during his reign – so he must have been a weak ruler. He's a prime choice if you need a weaselly medieval villain for your book. Ivanhoe's John doesn't actually appear that much in the book – he's mainly there because the novel needs political instability to make its adventure plot work. The threat of Prince John's revolt against his brother is what forces Ivanhoe to travel early on to York, even though he's wounded, which leads to Rebecca's kidnapping, and the rest is (literally) history. There just isn't much sympathy in the novel for Prince John. Scott doesn't give him the same kind of character development he gives King Richard. Because we spend so much time with "the Black Knight," we get to know Scott's vision of the guy behind the historical Richard. Prince John, however, is always "Prince John, Villain." We know from the first chapter that it's his fault the Norman lords are getting cocky and bullying the Saxons. We do get some analysis of Prince John's character from Scott, though. Even if Scott doesn't seem to like the man, he does try to think through what makes him tick. According to Scott, Prince John's problem is a mix of arrogance and bad luck. For example, when the time comes for Ivanhoe to choose the tournament's Queen of Beauty and Love, John suggests Waldemar Fitzurse's daughter, the Lady Alicia. John wants to show his counselor some respect by drawing everyone's attention to his daughter. But by making it even more obvious and public that Ivanhoe is ignoring Lady Alicia in favor of Rowena, Prince John only makes Fitzurse angrier and more embarrassed. That's his bad luck. Prince John also alienates people by being his own not-so-sweet self. When they hear that his brother is back in England, all of Prince John's supporters start to desert him, because no one has any personal loyalty or feeling for him. They've joined him only because it was convenient or profitable to do so. As soon as things begin to look bleak for John, all of his "supporters" ditch him. The narrator emphasizes that "[f]ew of [Prince John's followers] were attached to him from inclination, and none from personal regard" (15.1). Of course, Prince John's unpopularity is his own fault, since he's a greedy and horrible person. But still, we feel kind of bad for the guy – it can't be fun standing in Richard's shadow. When Prince John finally appears to his brother after the plot has been exposed and put down, Richard decides not to execute or even imprison his rebellious sibling. He just sends little brother to stay with their mother. Considering what a tough lady their mother, Eleanor of Aquitaine, was, that might have been punishment enough.
Our title character is a puzzle we can never completely solve; the more we think about her, the more she eludes us. Our knowledge about Rebecca is filtered through the narrator, and because she's the second wife of Rebecca's husband, we can't be sure all of our narrator's information is quite reliable. Through this narrative filter, we hear about Rebecca from a variety of different people who knew her. The chief sources of information about Rebecca – Mrs. Danvers, Maxim, and Favell – are extremely unreliable and maybe even insane. Ben offers some persuasive testimony about her, but Ben's grasp on reality and his motivations are questionable. We don't read any of Rebecca's personal writings, and she never actually appears in the story. Her power over the other characters seems entirely of their own making. Yet, things are left open enough to tantalize us with the possibility that Rebecca is somehow reaching from out from the grave. Once we sift through the various takes on Rebecca, we can safely identify a few character traits. We know that she's cover-girl beautiful, extremely charming, and hospitable. We also know that she's really talented at organizing fabulous parties and an expert at running a mansion. We know she excels in every kind of sport, from hunting to horse riding to sailing. She seems fearless and independent. Of course, this is the surface view, which the unreliable characters are trying shave away to expose the "real" Rebecca.
Obvs, Johnny is the most important character in the novel. And while the book is named after him, Johnny does a pretty good job of summing up his all-star status by himself: "The two youngest Laphams were always insulting him, not only about how smart he was, but how smart he thought he was. He didn't care" (1.1.47). Haters gonna hate, right?
Obvs, Johnny is the most important character in the novel. And while the book is named after him, Johnny does a pretty good job of summing up his all-star status by himself: "The two youngest Laphams were always insulting him, not only about how smart he was, but how smart he thought he was. He didn't care" (1.1.47). Haters gonna hate, right?
The protagonist of the novel. Johnny is the fourteen-year-old prize apprentice of the Boston silver-smith Ephraim Lapham. Johnny is a talented craftsman, but he is also arrogant, rash, and slightly cruel; he gains pleasure tormenting the two other apprentices, Dusty and Dove, by touting his superiority. When Johnny’s hand is disfigured in an accident, he can no longer work as a silversmith, and his sense of self is imperiled. As the rebellious colonists begin to fight England for their identity, Johnny finds a new life among the leaders of the Boston Whig party and finds himself transformed from a selfish youth into a patriotic young man.
Hoseason is an interesting contradiction in terms (sound familiar yet?). He's a "great churchgoer while on shore" (9.22), and the name of his ship is associated with religion. (The Covenanters were a seventeenth century group of Scottish Protestants who wanted to set up a system of church government based on Parliamentary representation rather than a king. Check out either this site or our note in the "Detailed Summary" of Chapter 5 for more on the Covenanters.)But Hoseason is an absolute hypocrite. He's sorry when his first mate, Mr. Shuan, kills Ransome the cabin boy, but why didn't he step in to stop Mr. Shuan's systematic abuse in the first place? He imagines himself as a man of God, but he's willing to murder Alan Breck for his money belt. And he would have let Davie die in the hold of his ship were it not for the intervention of his second mate, Mr. Riach.Davie's ability as a narrator really shines through in his handling of Hoseason. Remember, Hoseason is planning to sell Davie to a plantation in the Carolinas for profit. As imperfect as Davie is, he's still able to sympathize with his enemies. This gets us back to our larger point about Stevenson's interest in complicated, contradictory characters (like Davie and Alan).Yes, Hoseason is a complete jerk to Davie, but Davie finds it in himself to describe Hoseason's feelings about his ship relatively sympathetically: His brig was like wife and child to him; he had looked on, day by day, at the mishandling of poor Ransome; but when it came to the brig, he seemed to suffer along with her. (13.36)Obviously, this assessment is not completely nonjudgmental: Davie notes that Hoseason gave Shuan's abuse of Ransome a pass. At the same time, Davie does portray Hoseason's genuine pain at the loss of his ship. He allows Hoseason some roundness of character, portraying him less like a stereotypical villain and more like a human being.
The captain of the ship Hoseason abducts David onto his ship on the orders of David's uncle Ebenezer, and later tries to kill David and Alan Breck Stewart. He is shipwrecked after the founders on the Torran Rocks.
We think Long John Silver is the best part of this book. He's totally what we imagine a pirate should be: cunning, sly, peg-legged, with a parrot on his shoulder. There's a reason why he's what we think of when we hear the word "pirate." It's in part because of Long John Silver's popularity as a character that Treasure Island has become the most popular, most enduring pirate novel ever. Long John Silver seems like the classic pirate because he's the character whom all other pirates in popular culture are based on. He's the granddaddy of them all, and we love him for it. Long John Silver is a quartermaster, which means he handles the ship's food and drink during the voyage. That's also why his fellow pirates call him Barbecue. He's apparently the only man whom the legendary pirate Captain Flint was afraid of ("Flint his own self was feared of me" (11.13)). And since we discover later in the book that Captain Flint managed to singlehandedly kill six of his crew while he was burying his treasure on the island, Long John Silver must be a pretty tough, terrifying guy. But he's first and foremost a con man, so the rage and violence that lie under the surface are hidden underneath a mask that's as smooth as pudding. We see examples over and over again of Long John Silver's incredibly persuasive manner. He tricks Squire Trelawney, who is, OK, not that bright. Still, the fact that a man as interested in duty and class as Squire Trelawney would believe a quartermaster (Long John Silver) over a captain (Captain Smollett) is a sign of how persuasive Long John Silver can be. We also get to watch him convincing young Dick Johnson to join the pirates while aboard the Hispaniola: You may imagine how I felt when I heard this abominable old rogue [Silver] addressing another in the very same words of flattery as he had used to myself. I think, if I had been able, that I would have killed him through the barrel. (11.6) What irks Jim the most about Long John Silver's show of friendliness and respect for Dick Johnson is that he recognizes that Long John Silver has been using the same lines on Jim himself! Jim may be creative and intelligent, but he's no match for the slippery Long John Silver. The thing is, Long John Silver has a lot of qualities that make him appealing to the reader: he's incredibly wily and well-spoken, he's practical and quick to change sides if he needs to, and he's brave. Actually, if you just read the descriptions without thinking "pirate," Long John Silver sounds a lot like an older, smarter version of Jim Hawkins. But of course, he is a pirate (or "gentleman of fortune," as he likes to be called), so he can't totally win out in the end. Even Stevenson, who is pretty unconventional, can't allow Silver to succeed in his original plan of killing all the non-pirates on board the Hispaniola and making off with all 700 thousand British pounds of treasure. Still, the fact that Long John Silver is so appealing means that it would be equally unsatisfying to the reader for him to be shot down like a dog (like Israel Hands) or marooned on the island (like Tom Morgan). We like him, even if he is a rogue. So the book compromises by letting Long John Silver disappear: he slips away from the Hispaniola with a sack of coins when Squire Trelawney, Doctor Livesey, and Jim Hawkins are ashore at the end of the novel. Long John Silver may not get exactly what he wants, but he escapes punishment, as all good tricksters should. Long John Silver's inconclusive ending also leaves open the possibility of future adventures. Who knows where or when this charming, cunning pirate might show up again? After all, there are still bars of silver buried on Captain Flint's island. Treasure Island's open-endedness invites the reader to imagine future adventures using the colorful character of Long John Silver as a stand-in. By leaving a question mark over his fate, we can dream of meeting him ourselves – and perhaps getting caught up in treasure hunts of our own. Long John Silver is unlike all the other pirates in this novel in two ways: he owns property and he has a wife. (Three if you count the fact that he's smart, and most of the others are total idiots.) Long John Silver is the legitimate owner of a pub in the coastal town of Bristol, and he's married to an African woman. (Stevenson calls this woman a derogatory term for a black woman; we won't reproduce it here because we find it offensive.) Neither of these facts takes up a huge amount of space in the novel, but they indicate something special about Long John Silver: he blurs boundaries. Where the other pirates of the novel drink their fortunes away and go back to begging or crime all too quickly, Long John Silver is planning for the future. He's settling down and trying to become an actual gentleman, not just a gentleman of fortune. Even Israel Hands comments: He's no common man, Barbecue, [...] He had good schooling in his young days, and can speak like a book when so minded. (10.14) The fact that Long John Silver is an educated property owner not only differentiates him from the other (wasteful, reckless) pirates of the novel. It also suggests untold adventures in his past. What brought an educated man to piracy? How did he get to be sea-cook to Captain Flint? Long John's Silver's intriguingly unclear origins lend a sense of mystery and excitement to the character. For readers of Robert Louis Stevenson's day, Long John Silver's mixed-race marriage would have been a part of that mystery. He is married to an African woman at a time when mixed-race marriages were not common or even considered acceptable. So he lives both inside and outside the law. He owns property (inside the law), but is still a pirate (definitely outside the law). And he is married (inside the law), but to a woman of a different race (socially unacceptable in the 19th century). He breaks rules and challenges the simplistic binaries of good guy/bad guy in multiple ways, which makes him all the more alluring. The character of Long John Silver is based on a real-life buddy of Robert Louis Stevenson's (sadly, not a real-life pirate): William Ernest Henley. Like Stevenson, Henley was a writer of renown. Also like Stevenson, Henley spent much of his life sick with tuberculosis. He even had to have his leg amputated (hence Long John Silver's peg-leg). But Henley never let his illness stop him from participating actively in the literary scene of 19th-century Britain. His stubbornness, courage, and intimidation of lesser minds around him made him a compelling figure, and an excellent model for gentleman pirate Long John Silver. (Read more about Henley here.)
We think Long John Silver is the best part of this book. He's totally what we imagine a pirate should be: cunning, sly, peg-legged, with a parrot on his shoulder. There's a reason why he's what we think of when we hear the word "pirate." It's in part because of Long John Silver's popularity as a character that Treasure Island has become the most popular, most enduring pirate novel ever. Long John Silver seems like the classic pirate because he's the character whom all other pirates in popular culture are based on. He's the granddaddy of them all, and we love him for it. Long John Silver is a quartermaster, which means he handles the ship's food and drink during the voyage. That's also why his fellow pirates call him Barbecue. He's apparently the only man whom the legendary pirate Captain Flint was afraid of ("Flint his own self was feared of me" (11.13)). And since we discover later in the book that Captain Flint managed to singlehandedly kill six of his crew while he was burying his treasure on the island, Long John Silver must be a pretty tough, terrifying guy. But he's first and foremost a con man, so the rage and violence that lie under the surface are hidden underneath a mask that's as smooth as pudding. We see examples over and over again of Long John Silver's incredibly persuasive manner. He tricks Squire Trelawney, who is, OK, not that bright. Still, the fact that a man as interested in duty and class as Squire Trelawney would believe a quartermaster (Long John Silver) over a captain (Captain Smollett) is a sign of how persuasive Long John Silver can be. We also get to watch him convincing young Dick Johnson to join the pirates while aboard the Hispaniola: You may imagine how I felt when I heard this abominable old rogue [Silver] addressing another in the very same words of flattery as he had used to myself. I think, if I had been able, that I would have killed him through the barrel. (11.6) What irks Jim the most about Long John Silver's show of friendliness and respect for Dick Johnson is that he recognizes that Long John Silver has been using the same lines on Jim himself! Jim may be creative and intelligent, but he's no match for the slippery Long John Silver. The thing is, Long John Silver has a lot of qualities that make him appealing to the reader: he's incredibly wily and well-spoken, he's practical and quick to change sides if he needs to, and he's brave. Actually, if you just read the descriptions without thinking "pirate," Long John Silver sounds a lot like an older, smarter version of Jim Hawkins. But of course, he is a pirate (or "gentleman of fortune," as he likes to be called), so he can't totally win out in the end. Even Stevenson, who is pretty unconventional, can't allow Silver to succeed in his original plan of killing all the non-pirates on board the Hispaniola and making off with all 700 thousand British pounds of treasure. Still, the fact that Long John Silver is so appealing means that it would be equally unsatisfying to the reader for him to be shot down like a dog (like Israel Hands) or marooned on the island (like Tom Morgan). We like him, even if he is a rogue. So the book compromises by letting Long John Silver disappear: he slips away from the Hispaniola with a sack of coins when Squire Trelawney, Doctor Livesey, and Jim Hawkins are ashore at the end of the novel. Long John Silver may not get exactly what he wants, but he escapes punishment, as all good tricksters should. Long John Silver's inconclusive ending also leaves open the possibility of future adventures. Who knows where or when this charming, cunning pirate might show up again? After all, there are still bars of silver buried on Captain Flint's island. Treasure Island's open-endedness invites the reader to imagine future adventures using the colorful character of Long John Silver as a stand-in. By leaving a question mark over his fate, we can dream of meeting him ourselves – and perhaps getting caught up in treasure hunts of our own. Long John Silver is unlike all the other pirates in this novel in two ways: he owns property and he has a wife. (Three if you count the fact that he's smart, and most of the others are total idiots.) Long John Silver is the legitimate owner of a pub in the coastal town of Bristol, and he's married to an African woman. (Stevenson calls this woman a derogatory term for a black woman; we won't reproduce it here because we find it offensive.) Neither of these facts takes up a huge amount of space in the novel, but they indicate something special about Long John Silver: he blurs boundaries. Where the other pirates of the novel drink their fortunes away and go back to begging or crime all too quickly, Long John Silver is planning for the future. He's settling down and trying to become an actual gentleman, not just a gentleman of fortune. Even Israel Hands comments: He's no common man, Barbecue, [...] He had good schooling in his young days, and can speak like a book when so minded. (10.14) The fact that Long John Silver is an educated property owner not only differentiates him from the other (wasteful, reckless) pirates of the novel. It also suggests untold adventures in his past. What brought an educated man to piracy? How did he get to be sea-cook to Captain Flint? Long John's Silver's intriguingly unclear origins lend a sense of mystery and excitement to the character. For readers of Robert Louis Stevenson's day, Long John Silver's mixed-race marriage would have been a part of that mystery. He is married to an African woman at a time when mixed-race marriages were not common or even considered acceptable. So he lives both inside and outside the law. He owns property (inside the law), but is still a pirate (definitely outside the law). And he is married (inside the law), but to a woman of a different race (socially unacceptable in the 19th century). He breaks rules and challenges the simplistic binaries of good guy/bad guy in multiple ways, which makes him all the more alluring. The character of Long John Silver is based on a real-life buddy of Robert Louis Stevenson's (sadly, not a real-life pirate): William Ernest Henley. Like Stevenson, Henley was a writer of renown. Also like Stevenson, Henley spent much of his life sick with tuberculosis. He even had to have his leg amputated (hence Long John Silver's peg-leg). But Henley never let his illness stop him from participating actively in the literary scene of 19th-century Britain. His stubbornness, courage, and intimidation of lesser minds around him made him a compelling figure, and an excellent model for gentleman pirate Long John Silver. (Read more about Henley here.)
We think Long John Silver is the best part of this book. He's totally what we imagine a pirate should be: cunning, sly, peg-legged, with a parrot on his shoulder. There's a reason why he's what we think of when we hear the word "pirate." It's in part because of Long John Silver's popularity as a character that Treasure Island has become the most popular, most enduring pirate novel ever. Long John Silver seems like the classic pirate because he's the character whom all other pirates in popular culture are based on. He's the granddaddy of them all, and we love him for it. Long John Silver is a quartermaster, which means he handles the ship's food and drink during the voyage. That's also why his fellow pirates call him Barbecue. He's apparently the only man whom the legendary pirate Captain Flint was afraid of ("Flint his own self was feared of me" (11.13)). And since we discover later in the book that Captain Flint managed to singlehandedly kill six of his crew while he was burying his treasure on the island, Long John Silver must be a pretty tough, terrifying guy. But he's first and foremost a con man, so the rage and violence that lie under the surface are hidden underneath a mask that's as smooth as pudding. We see examples over and over again of Long John Silver's incredibly persuasive manner. He tricks Squire Trelawney, who is, OK, not that bright. Still, the fact that a man as interested in duty and class as Squire Trelawney would believe a quartermaster (Long John Silver) over a captain (Captain Smollett) is a sign of how persuasive Long John Silver can be. We also get to watch him convincing young Dick Johnson to join the pirates while aboard the Hispaniola: You may imagine how I felt when I heard this abominable old rogue [Silver] addressing another in the very same words of flattery as he had used to myself. I think, if I had been able, that I would have killed him through the barrel. (11.6) What irks Jim the most about Long John Silver's show of friendliness and respect for Dick Johnson is that he recognizes that Long John Silver has been using the same lines on Jim himself! Jim may be creative and intelligent, but he's no match for the slippery Long John Silver. The thing is, Long John Silver has a lot of qualities that make him appealing to the reader: he's incredibly wily and well-spoken, he's practical and quick to change sides if he needs to, and he's brave. Actually, if you just read the descriptions without thinking "pirate," Long John Silver sounds a lot like an older, smarter version of Jim Hawkins. But of course, he is a pirate (or "gentleman of fortune," as he likes to be called), so he can't totally win out in the end. Even Stevenson, who is pretty unconventional, can't allow Silver to succeed in his original plan of killing all the non-pirates on board the Hispaniola and making off with all 700 thousand British pounds of treasure. Still, the fact that Long John Silver is so appealing means that it would be equally unsatisfying to the reader for him to be shot down like a dog (like Israel Hands) or marooned on the island (like Tom Morgan). We like him, even if he is a rogue. So the book compromises by letting Long John Silver disappear: he slips away from the Hispaniola with a sack of coins when Squire Trelawney, Doctor Livesey, and Jim Hawkins are ashore at the end of the novel. Long John Silver may not get exactly what he wants, but he escapes punishment, as all good tricksters should. Long John Silver's inconclusive ending also leaves open the possibility of future adventures. Who knows where or when this charming, cunning pirate might show up again? After all, there are still bars of silver buried on Captain Flint's island. Treasure Island's open-endedness invites the reader to imagine future adventures using the colorful character of Long John Silver as a stand-in. By leaving a question mark over his fate, we can dream of meeting him ourselves – and perhaps getting caught up in treasure hunts of our own. Long John Silver is unlike all the other pirates in this novel in two ways: he owns property and he has a wife. (Three if you count the fact that he's smart, and most of the others are total idiots.) Long John Silver is the legitimate owner of a pub in the coastal town of Bristol, and he's married to an African woman. (Stevenson calls this woman a derogatory term for a black woman; we won't reproduce it here because we find it offensive.) Neither of these facts takes up a huge amount of space in the novel, but they indicate something special about Long John Silver: he blurs boundaries. Where the other pirates of the novel drink their fortunes away and go back to begging or crime all too quickly, Long John Silver is planning for the future. He's settling down and trying to become an actual gentleman, not just a gentleman of fortune. Even Israel Hands comments: He's no common man, Barbecue, [...] He had good schooling in his young days, and can speak like a book when so minded. (10.14) The fact that Long John Silver is an educated property owner not only differentiates him from the other (wasteful, reckless) pirates of the novel. It also suggests untold adventures in his past. What brought an educated man to piracy? How did he get to be sea-cook to Captain Flint? Long John's Silver's intriguingly unclear origins lend a sense of mystery and excitement to the character. For readers of Robert Louis Stevenson's day, Long John Silver's mixed-race marriage would have been a part of that mystery. He is married to an African woman at a time when mixed-race marriages were not common or even considered acceptable. So he lives both inside and outside the law. He owns property (inside the law), but is still a pirate (definitely outside the law). And he is married (inside the law), but to a woman of a different race (socially unacceptable in the 19th century). He breaks rules and challenges the simplistic binaries of good guy/bad guy in multiple ways, which makes him all the more alluring. The character of Long John Silver is based on a real-life buddy of Robert Louis Stevenson's (sadly, not a real-life pirate): William Ernest Henley. Like Stevenson, Henley was a writer of renown. Also like Stevenson, Henley spent much of his life sick with tuberculosis. He even had to have his leg amputated (hence Long John Silver's peg-leg). But Henley never let his illness stop him from participating actively in the literary scene of 19th-century Britain. His stubbornness, courage, and intimidation of lesser minds around him made him a compelling figure, and an excellent model for gentleman pirate Long John Silver. (Read more about Henley here.)
The cook on the voyage to Treasure Island. Silver is the secret ringleader of the pirate band. His physical and emotional strength is impressive. Silver is deceitful and disloyal, greedy and visceral, and does not care about human relations. Yet he is always kind toward Jim and genuinely fond of the boy. Silver is a powerful mixture of charisma and self-destructiveness, individualism and recklessness.
The cook on the voyage to Treasure Island. Silver is the secret ringleader of the pirate band. His physical and emotional strength is impressive. Silver is deceitful and disloyal, greedy and visceral, and does not care about human relations. Yet he is always kind toward Jim and genuinely fond of the boy. Silver is a powerful mixture of charisma and self-destructiveness, individualism and recklessness.
The cook on the voyage to Treasure Island. Silver is the secret ringleader of the pirate band. His physical and emotional strength is impressive. Silver is deceitful and disloyal, greedy and visceral, and does not care about human relations. Yet he is always kind toward Jim and genuinely fond of the boy. Silver is a powerful mixture of charisma and self-destructiveness, individualism and recklessness.
The head of the Efrafa warren and the only rabbit bigger and stronger than Bigwig. Militant and vengeful, Woundwort tries to destroy Hazel's warren and in doing so almost destroys his own.
Cassia's Official isn't your typical character. Honestly, we really know almost nothing about her outside of her job description, which is basically to threaten Cassia and make her life miserable on behalf of the Society. She's the kind of person that says "'poison is unbelievably humane'" (30.89) without batting an eye. In other words, the Official is one of those sinister characters that inexplicably causes heart palpitations in everyone she speaks to. As Cassia tells us: Then she turns her gaze on me and I feel my heart racing, my pulse pounding clear to my fingertips. (22.25) Very little scares Cassia, so it's notable that she has this visceral reaction to the Official. The Official's other favorite pastime is mocking Cassia and assuring her that everything unique to her identity is totally predictable and they've seen it seventy-eight times before. Cassia says at one point: I hate the Officials most when they do this: they act as if they have seen it all before, as if they have seen me before. (22.32) Acting this way is a means of control, of sending Cassia the message that she's not special and she can't outwit the system—Cassia realizes her Official doesn't know everything though (more on that over in Cassia's analysis elsewhere in this section). In a final act of sadism, Cassia's Official catches her skipping the red pill after Ky is sent off and smiles creepily, letting Cassia suffer with the memory of what she's done to Ky. When Cassia explains why—"She wants me to remember what happened here. What I've done" (29.85)—we know that the Official officially has an appetite for destruction.
Satan Before his rebellion, he was known as Lucifer and was second only to God. His envy of the Son creates Sin, and in an incestuous relationship with his daughter, he produces the offspring, Death. His rebellion is easily crushed by the Son, and he is cast into Hell. His goal is to corrupt God's new creations, Man and Earth. He succeeds in bringing about the fall of Adam and Eve but is punished for the act. He can shift his shape and tempts Eve in the form of a serpent. He appears noble to Man but not in comparison to God.
Satan Before his rebellion, he was known as Lucifer and was second only to God. His envy of the Son creates Sin, and in an incestuous relationship with his daughter, he produces the offspring, Death. His rebellion is easily crushed by the Son, and he is cast into Hell. His goal is to corrupt God's new creations, Man and Earth. He succeeds in bringing about the fall of Adam and Eve but is punished for the act. He can shift his shape and tempts Eve in the form of a serpent. He appears noble to Man but not in comparison to God.
Satan Before his rebellion, he was known as Lucifer and was second only to God. His envy of the Son creates Sin, and in an incestuous relationship with his daughter, he produces the offspring, Death. His rebellion is easily crushed by the Son, and he is cast into Hell. His goal is to corrupt God's new creations, Man and Earth. He succeeds in bringing about the fall of Adam and Eve but is punished for the act. He can shift his shape and tempts Eve in the form of a serpent. He appears noble to Man but not in comparison to God.
Satan Before his rebellion, he was known as Lucifer and was second only to God. His envy of the Son creates Sin, and in an incestuous relationship with his daughter, he produces the offspring, Death. His rebellion is easily crushed by the Son, and he is cast into Hell. His goal is to corrupt God's new creations, Man and Earth. He succeeds in bringing about the fall of Adam and Eve but is punished for the act. He can shift his shape and tempts Eve in the form of a serpent. He appears noble to Man but not in comparison to God.
Milton's Satan is one of the most dynamic and complicated characters in all of literature. While he possesses an unhealthy thirst for vengeance and havoc like the little red dude with a pitchfork you're used to seeing, Satan is also the most likeable character in the poem. OK, maybe likeable is going a bit too far, but nearly every reader of the poem has found it difficult to avoid sympathizing with him to some degree, if not completely. For many years readers of the poem have been divided over the question of whose side Milton was on: Satan's or God's.Just bear with us here. Satan is flat-out, hands down, without a doubt, the best speaker in the poem. He's like the greatest Shakespearean actor you've ever seen. When he wakes up in Hell, chained to a burning lake, how can we not feel a bit sorry for him? All he really tried to do was overthrow God, which is impossible anyway because we're talking about God here. Yeah we get that he's God, but when we actually meet God in Book 3, he doesn't even compare to Satan. He comes off like some boring unnamed character, whereas Satan is like an evil Hamlet, or Iago, or any other major character that isn't a talking corpse (check out his famous speech on Mt. Niphates in 4.32 to get a sense of Satan's Shakespearean flavor). The great English poet Percy Shelley, who idolized Milton, summarized the point well: Nothing can exceed the energy and magnificence of the character of Satan. It is a mistake to suppose that he could ever have been intended for the popular personification of evil.Sadly, however, Satan really is evil. But his is a very seductive kind of evil, which makes him even more dangerous (just think Tom Riddle from the Harry Potter series). Let's consider an example. We just said that God seems like a boring, authoritative figure; well, that's how he comes across. But that's also what Satan would love for us to believe about God. In Books 2 and 5 especially, Satan does a great job of portraying God as some type of fascist despot or tyrant who loves arbitrary power. Sometimes, Satan even acts like he's some kind of innocent victim.OK, God's power is arbitrary, that much is true; but he's also the boss. It's his universe; he created it. All he wants from Satan, and everybody else, is a thank you in the morning for being allowed to live in Heaven….FOREVER! Is that really so much to ask? Does that sound like despotism? Not really. But listening to Satan's impassioned speeches and their infectious rhetoric might make you think so.It turns out, conveniently and ingeniously, that Satan's speeches are uncannily like the animal whose shape he dons to tempt Eve: the serpent. They are tricky, clever, wily, and anything but straightforward. For example, whereas Satan will champion some type of heroic perseverance or a refusal to repent and submit to God's slavery, he's really just ticked off that he lost the war in Heaven and that he has to live in Hell. He knows that his auditors (which include us) love that kind of rhetoric, which has proven successful and seductive for centuries.Sometimes, Satan tries a different angle; at one point he even sheds a tear, a moment that bears some similarities with the sadness he feels when he sees Adam and Eve in Paradise and realizes he's screwed (he actually says "Oh Hell" at that moment). Poor Satan, right? Wrong. He really just wants to make Adam and Eve suffer to spite God; he wants to ruin it for two human creatures who, from one perspective, are his brother and sister (they're God's creations too). Adam and Eve had nothing to do with his spat with God; they're just pawns in Satan's game, innocent victims whom Satan cruelly takes advantage of.OK, we get it: Satan is a great speaker, but he's a really mean dude. He's smart and knows what everybody wants to hear, but he's also very dangerous. Why then, does he take up so much space in the poem? Why is he without a doubt the most interesting character in Paradise Lost? Before we meet God, the Son, Adam and Eve, or anybody else, we meet Satan. In fact, his is almost the only voice we hear for the first two books of the poem! We can see why he's attractive, but our buddy John Milton's motives for letting the villain steal the show are more complicated, especially considering the poem's supposed purpose of "justifying the ways of God to man."The question of why Satan gets so much face time is difficult to answer; one reason that Satan is so attractive and dominates the early books of the poem is because Milton wants us to be seduced, wants us to be lured by Satan's infectious words only so he (Milton) can correct us later and show us the error of our ways. In this way, Milton re-enacts the Fall for his readers: like Eve, we buy into Satan's arguments, only to suffer the punishment of Milton's rebuke. Similarly, when we first see the Garden of Eden it is through Satan's eyes. When Satan sees what he's excluded from, it suddenly becomes clear to us what the consequences of siding with Satan are: we won't be able to get into paradise (exactly what happens to Adam and Eve in the end).But one could easily say that Milton doesn't want us to succumb to Satan's snares. In that case, Satan becomes another temptation to resist. Throughout his writings, Milton champions a notion of trial, whereby virtue is meaningless unless it confronts and resists temptations, dangers, etc. From this perspective, Milton is testing us as readers, attempting to appeal to the good angel on our shoulder over the attractive but ultimately evil devil on the other shoulder.
Milton's Satan is one of the most dynamic and complicated characters in all of literature. While he possesses an unhealthy thirst for vengeance and havoc like the little red dude with a pitchfork you're used to seeing, Satan is also the most likeable character in the poem. OK, maybe likeable is going a bit too far, but nearly every reader of the poem has found it difficult to avoid sympathizing with him to some degree, if not completely. For many years readers of the poem have been divided over the question of whose side Milton was on: Satan's or God's.Just bear with us here. Satan is flat-out, hands down, without a doubt, the best speaker in the poem. He's like the greatest Shakespearean actor you've ever seen. When he wakes up in Hell, chained to a burning lake, how can we not feel a bit sorry for him? All he really tried to do was overthrow God, which is impossible anyway because we're talking about God here. Yeah we get that he's God, but when we actually meet God in Book 3, he doesn't even compare to Satan. He comes off like some boring unnamed character, whereas Satan is like an evil Hamlet, or Iago, or any other major character that isn't a talking corpse (check out his famous speech on Mt. Niphates in 4.32 to get a sense of Satan's Shakespearean flavor). The great English poet Percy Shelley, who idolized Milton, summarized the point well: Nothing can exceed the energy and magnificence of the character of Satan. It is a mistake to suppose that he could ever have been intended for the popular personification of evil.Sadly, however, Satan really is evil. But his is a very seductive kind of evil, which makes him even more dangerous (just think Tom Riddle from the Harry Potter series). Let's consider an example. We just said that God seems like a boring, authoritative figure; well, that's how he comes across. But that's also what Satan would love for us to believe about God. In Books 2 and 5 especially, Satan does a great job of portraying God as some type of fascist despot or tyrant who loves arbitrary power. Sometimes, Satan even acts like he's some kind of innocent victim.OK, God's power is arbitrary, that much is true; but he's also the boss. It's his universe; he created it. All he wants from Satan, and everybody else, is a thank you in the morning for being allowed to live in Heaven….FOREVER! Is that really so much to ask? Does that sound like despotism? Not really. But listening to Satan's impassioned speeches and their infectious rhetoric might make you think so.It turns out, conveniently and ingeniously, that Satan's speeches are uncannily like the animal whose shape he dons to tempt Eve: the serpent. They are tricky, clever, wily, and anything but straightforward. For example, whereas Satan will champion some type of heroic perseverance or a refusal to repent and submit to God's slavery, he's really just ticked off that he lost the war in Heaven and that he has to live in Hell. He knows that his auditors (which include us) love that kind of rhetoric, which has proven successful and seductive for centuries.Sometimes, Satan tries a different angle; at one point he even sheds a tear, a moment that bears some similarities with the sadness he feels when he sees Adam and Eve in Paradise and realizes he's screwed (he actually says "Oh Hell" at that moment). Poor Satan, right? Wrong. He really just wants to make Adam and Eve suffer to spite God; he wants to ruin it for two human creatures who, from one perspective, are his brother and sister (they're God's creations too). Adam and Eve had nothing to do with his spat with God; they're just pawns in Satan's game, innocent victims whom Satan cruelly takes advantage of.OK, we get it: Satan is a great speaker, but he's a really mean dude. He's smart and knows what everybody wants to hear, but he's also very dangerous. Why then, does he take up so much space in the poem? Why is he without a doubt the most interesting character in Paradise Lost? Before we meet God, the Son, Adam and Eve, or anybody else, we meet Satan. In fact, his is almost the only voice we hear for the first two books of the poem! We can see why he's attractive, but our buddy John Milton's motives for letting the villain steal the show are more complicated, especially considering the poem's supposed purpose of "justifying the ways of God to man."The question of why Satan gets so much face time is difficult to answer; one reason that Satan is so attractive and dominates the early books of the poem is because Milton wants us to be seduced, wants us to be lured by Satan's infectious words only so he (Milton) can correct us later and show us the error of our ways. In this way, Milton re-enacts the Fall for his readers: like Eve, we buy into Satan's arguments, only to suffer the punishment of Milton's rebuke. Similarly, when we first see the Garden of Eden it is through Satan's eyes. When Satan sees what he's excluded from, it suddenly becomes clear to us what the consequences of siding with Satan are: we won't be able to get into paradise (exactly what happens to Adam and Eve in the end).But one could easily say that Milton doesn't want us to succumb to Satan's snares. In that case, Satan becomes another temptation to resist. Throughout his writings, Milton champions a notion of trial, whereby virtue is meaningless unless it confronts and resists temptations, dangers, etc. From this perspective, Milton is testing us as readers, attempting to appeal to the good angel on our shoulder over the attractive but ultimately evil devil on the other shoulder.
Milton's Satan is one of the most dynamic and complicated characters in all of literature. While he possesses an unhealthy thirst for vengeance and havoc like the little red dude with a pitchfork you're used to seeing, Satan is also the most likeable character in the poem. OK, maybe likeable is going a bit too far, but nearly every reader of the poem has found it difficult to avoid sympathizing with him to some degree, if not completely. For many years readers of the poem have been divided over the question of whose side Milton was on: Satan's or God's.Just bear with us here. Satan is flat-out, hands down, without a doubt, the best speaker in the poem. He's like the greatest Shakespearean actor you've ever seen. When he wakes up in Hell, chained to a burning lake, how can we not feel a bit sorry for him? All he really tried to do was overthrow God, which is impossible anyway because we're talking about God here. Yeah we get that he's God, but when we actually meet God in Book 3, he doesn't even compare to Satan. He comes off like some boring unnamed character, whereas Satan is like an evil Hamlet, or Iago, or any other major character that isn't a talking corpse (check out his famous speech on Mt. Niphates in 4.32 to get a sense of Satan's Shakespearean flavor). The great English poet Percy Shelley, who idolized Milton, summarized the point well: Nothing can exceed the energy and magnificence of the character of Satan. It is a mistake to suppose that he could ever have been intended for the popular personification of evil.Sadly, however, Satan really is evil. But his is a very seductive kind of evil, which makes him even more dangerous (just think Tom Riddle from the Harry Potter series). Let's consider an example. We just said that God seems like a boring, authoritative figure; well, that's how he comes across. But that's also what Satan would love for us to believe about God. In Books 2 and 5 especially, Satan does a great job of portraying God as some type of fascist despot or tyrant who loves arbitrary power. Sometimes, Satan even acts like he's some kind of innocent victim.OK, God's power is arbitrary, that much is true; but he's also the boss. It's his universe; he created it. All he wants from Satan, and everybody else, is a thank you in the morning for being allowed to live in Heaven….FOREVER! Is that really so much to ask? Does that sound like despotism? Not really. But listening to Satan's impassioned speeches and their infectious rhetoric might make you think so.It turns out, conveniently and ingeniously, that Satan's speeches are uncannily like the animal whose shape he dons to tempt Eve: the serpent. They are tricky, clever, wily, and anything but straightforward. For example, whereas Satan will champion some type of heroic perseverance or a refusal to repent and submit to God's slavery, he's really just ticked off that he lost the war in Heaven and that he has to live in Hell. He knows that his auditors (which include us) love that kind of rhetoric, which has proven successful and seductive for centuries.Sometimes, Satan tries a different angle; at one point he even sheds a tear, a moment that bears some similarities with the sadness he feels when he sees Adam and Eve in Paradise and realizes he's screwed (he actually says "Oh Hell" at that moment). Poor Satan, right? Wrong. He really just wants to make Adam and Eve suffer to spite God; he wants to ruin it for two human creatures who, from one perspective, are his brother and sister (they're God's creations too). Adam and Eve had nothing to do with his spat with God; they're just pawns in Satan's game, innocent victims whom Satan cruelly takes advantage of.OK, we get it: Satan is a great speaker, but he's a really mean dude. He's smart and knows what everybody wants to hear, but he's also very dangerous. Why then, does he take up so much space in the poem? Why is he without a doubt the most interesting character in Paradise Lost? Before we meet God, the Son, Adam and Eve, or anybody else, we meet Satan. In fact, his is almost the only voice we hear for the first two books of the poem! We can see why he's attractive, but our buddy John Milton's motives for letting the villain steal the show are more complicated, especially considering the poem's supposed purpose of "justifying the ways of God to man."The question of why Satan gets so much face time is difficult to answer; one reason that Satan is so attractive and dominates the early books of the poem is because Milton wants us to be seduced, wants us to be lured by Satan's infectious words only so he (Milton) can correct us later and show us the error of our ways. In this way, Milton re-enacts the Fall for his readers: like Eve, we buy into Satan's arguments, only to suffer the punishment of Milton's rebuke. Similarly, when we first see the Garden of Eden it is through Satan's eyes. When Satan sees what he's excluded from, it suddenly becomes clear to us what the consequences of siding with Satan are: we won't be able to get into paradise (exactly what happens to Adam and Eve in the end).But one could easily say that Milton doesn't want us to succumb to Satan's snares. In that case, Satan becomes another temptation to resist. Throughout his writings, Milton champions a notion of trial, whereby virtue is meaningless unless it confronts and resists temptations, dangers, etc. From this perspective, Milton is testing us as readers, attempting to appeal to the good angel on our shoulder over the attractive but ultimately evil devil on the other shoulder.
Milton's Satan is one of the most dynamic and complicated characters in all of literature. While he possesses an unhealthy thirst for vengeance and havoc like the little red dude with a pitchfork you're used to seeing, Satan is also the most likeable character in the poem. OK, maybe likeable is going a bit too far, but nearly every reader of the poem has found it difficult to avoid sympathizing with him to some degree, if not completely. For many years readers of the poem have been divided over the question of whose side Milton was on: Satan's or God's.Just bear with us here. Satan is flat-out, hands down, without a doubt, the best speaker in the poem. He's like the greatest Shakespearean actor you've ever seen. When he wakes up in Hell, chained to a burning lake, how can we not feel a bit sorry for him? All he really tried to do was overthrow God, which is impossible anyway because we're talking about God here. Yeah we get that he's God, but when we actually meet God in Book 3, he doesn't even compare to Satan. He comes off like some boring unnamed character, whereas Satan is like an evil Hamlet, or Iago, or any other major character that isn't a talking corpse (check out his famous speech on Mt. Niphates in 4.32 to get a sense of Satan's Shakespearean flavor). The great English poet Percy Shelley, who idolized Milton, summarized the point well: Nothing can exceed the energy and magnificence of the character of Satan. It is a mistake to suppose that he could ever have been intended for the popular personification of evil.Sadly, however, Satan really is evil. But his is a very seductive kind of evil, which makes him even more dangerous (just think Tom Riddle from the Harry Potter series). Let's consider an example. We just said that God seems like a boring, authoritative figure; well, that's how he comes across. But that's also what Satan would love for us to believe about God. In Books 2 and 5 especially, Satan does a great job of portraying God as some type of fascist despot or tyrant who loves arbitrary power. Sometimes, Satan even acts like he's some kind of innocent victim.OK, God's power is arbitrary, that much is true; but he's also the boss. It's his universe; he created it. All he wants from Satan, and everybody else, is a thank you in the morning for being allowed to live in Heaven….FOREVER! Is that really so much to ask? Does that sound like despotism? Not really. But listening to Satan's impassioned speeches and their infectious rhetoric might make you think so.It turns out, conveniently and ingeniously, that Satan's speeches are uncannily like the animal whose shape he dons to tempt Eve: the serpent. They are tricky, clever, wily, and anything but straightforward. For example, whereas Satan will champion some type of heroic perseverance or a refusal to repent and submit to God's slavery, he's really just ticked off that he lost the war in Heaven and that he has to live in Hell. He knows that his auditors (which include us) love that kind of rhetoric, which has proven successful and seductive for centuries.Sometimes, Satan tries a different angle; at one point he even sheds a tear, a moment that bears some similarities with the sadness he feels when he sees Adam and Eve in Paradise and realizes he's screwed (he actually says "Oh Hell" at that moment). Poor Satan, right? Wrong. He really just wants to make Adam and Eve suffer to spite God; he wants to ruin it for two human creatures who, from one perspective, are his brother and sister (they're God's creations too). Adam and Eve had nothing to do with his spat with God; they're just pawns in Satan's game, innocent victims whom Satan cruelly takes advantage of.OK, we get it: Satan is a great speaker, but he's a really mean dude. He's smart and knows what everybody wants to hear, but he's also very dangerous. Why then, does he take up so much space in the poem? Why is he without a doubt the most interesting character in Paradise Lost? Before we meet God, the Son, Adam and Eve, or anybody else, we meet Satan. In fact, his is almost the only voice we hear for the first two books of the poem! We can see why he's attractive, but our buddy John Milton's motives for letting the villain steal the show are more complicated, especially considering the poem's supposed purpose of "justifying the ways of God to man."The question of why Satan gets so much face time is difficult to answer; one reason that Satan is so attractive and dominates the early books of the poem is because Milton wants us to be seduced, wants us to be lured by Satan's infectious words only so he (Milton) can correct us later and show us the error of our ways. In this way, Milton re-enacts the Fall for his readers: like Eve, we buy into Satan's arguments, only to suffer the punishment of Milton's rebuke. Similarly, when we first see the Garden of Eden it is through Satan's eyes. When Satan sees what he's excluded from, it suddenly becomes clear to us what the consequences of siding with Satan are: we won't be able to get into paradise (exactly what happens to Adam and Eve in the end).But one could easily say that Milton doesn't want us to succumb to Satan's snares. In that case, Satan becomes another temptation to resist. Throughout his writings, Milton champions a notion of trial, whereby virtue is meaningless unless it confronts and resists temptations, dangers, etc. From this perspective, Milton is testing us as readers, attempting to appeal to the good angel on our shoulder over the attractive but ultimately evil devil on the other shoulder.
Head of the rebellious angels who have just fallen from Heaven. As the poem’s antagonist, Satan is the originator of sin—the first to be ungrateful for God the Father’s blessings. He embarks on a mission to Earth that eventually leads to the fall of Adam and Eve, but also worsens his eternal punishment. His character changes throughout the poem. Satan often appears to speak rationally and persuasively, but later in the poem we see the inconsistency and irrationality of his thoughts. He can assume any form, adopting both glorious and humble shapes.
Head of the rebellious angels who have just fallen from Heaven. As the poem’s antagonist, Satan is the originator of sin—the first to be ungrateful for God the Father’s blessings. He embarks on a mission to Earth that eventually leads to the fall of Adam and Eve, but also worsens his eternal punishment. His character changes throughout the poem. Satan often appears to speak rationally and persuasively, but later in the poem we see the inconsistency and irrationality of his thoughts. He can assume any form, adopting both glorious and humble shapes.
Head of the rebellious angels who have just fallen from Heaven. As the poem’s antagonist, Satan is the originator of sin—the first to be ungrateful for God the Father’s blessings. He embarks on a mission to Earth that eventually leads to the fall of Adam and Eve, but also worsens his eternal punishment. His character changes throughout the poem. Satan often appears to speak rationally and persuasively, but later in the poem we see the inconsistency and irrationality of his thoughts. He can assume any form, adopting both glorious and humble shapes.
Head of the rebellious angels who have just fallen from Heaven. As the poem’s antagonist, Satan is the originator of sin—the first to be ungrateful for God the Father’s blessings. He embarks on a mission to Earth that eventually leads to the fall of Adam and Eve, but also worsens his eternal punishment. His character changes throughout the poem. Satan often appears to speak rationally and persuasively, but later in the poem we see the inconsistency and irrationality of his thoughts. He can assume any form, adopting both glorious and humble shapes.
Dinah Brand is a femme fatale for sure, but she also manages to break that mold. What's a femme fatale, you ask? It's a French term meaning deadly woman. A femme fatale is attractive, aggressive and sexually provocative. She uses her wily charms to lure men into dangerous situations to serve her own interests. In many ways, Dinah does seem to fall under the category of the typical femme fatale, especially since she knows how to control her men using her femininity. But Hammett also introduces some interesting modifications to his portrayal of the seductive Dinah. Take a look, for example, at how she's first described by the Op. Dinah appears to be a little overweight, sloppily dressed, with bloodshot eyes: Her course hair – brown – needed trimming and was parted crookedly. One side of her upper lip had been rouged higher than the other. Her dress was of a particularly unbecoming wine color, and it gaped here and there down one side, where she had neglected to snap the fasteners or they had popped open. There was a run down the front of her left stockings. This was the Dinah brand who took her pick of Poisonville's men, according to what I had been told. (4.14) This description isn't exactly what we'd expect to be the alluring but deadly vixen of the novel. Even though Dinah isn't the most stunningly beautiful femme fatale out there, the Op does describe her hand as being "soft, warm, strong" (4.13), all positive attributes and the Op can't deny that she does have a mysterious "It" factor that makes her attractive to men. And the more we see of Dinah, the more she grows on us. Her obsession with money would normally come off as petty and materialistic, but she is so upfront and honest about her mercenary interests, that we find it funny and even endearing. Dinah also sees money not merely so that she can buy things she wants, but because it gives her a sense of control and stability. As Dinah and the Op send more time together, even the Op starts to let down his walls and confide his fears to Dinah. That's why her death comes as such a shock in the novel. Out of all the corpses that start to pile up, Dinah's death is presented as the novel's most critical moment. And the Op's emotionless reaction to her murder is possibly the most morally troubling scene in the novel.
Tom Buchanan Daisy's hulking brute of a husband. Tom comes from an old, wealthy Chicago family and takes pride in his rough ways. He commands attention through his boisterous and outspoken (even racist) behavior. He leads a life of luxury in East Egg, playing polo, riding horses, and driving fast cars. He is proud of his affairs and has had many since his marriage. Myrtle Wilson is merely the woman of the moment for Tom.
Meet Tom. He's a: sturdy, straw-haired man of thirty with a rather hard mouth and a supercilious manner. Two shining, arrogant eyes had established dominance over his face, and gave him the appearance of always leaning aggressively forward … you could see a great pack of muscle shifting when his shoulder moved under his thin coat. It was a body capable of enormous leverage—a cruel body. (1) If you're getting the picture that our narrator doesn't much like Tom—we think you're right. But Nick is also fascinated with Tom. He probably can't help it; like Daisy, Tom is a fascinating kind of guy. Like Daisy, he's got something that everyone else wants: he's got power.
Daisy’s immensely wealthy husband, once a member of Nick’s social club at Yale. Powerfully built and hailing from a socially solid old family, Tom is an arrogant, hypocritical bully. His social attitudes are laced with racism and sexism, and he never even considers trying to live up to the moral standard he demands from those around him. He has no moral qualms about his own extramarital affair with Myrtle, but when he begins to suspect Daisy and Gatsby of having an affair, he becomes outraged and forces a confrontation.
D'Artagnan The main character of the novel, d'Artagnan was raised in the French province of Gascony, an area known for its courageous and brave men. The novel begins with his departure from home and his arrival in Paris, taking with him virtually nothing but his good looks, his honesty and integrity, his loyalty to both the king and the cardinal, and his expert swordsmanship. Despite initial blunders and difficulties, d'Artagnan quickly makes friends with the three musketeers, and later he finds himself in a position to do a great service for the queen of France. D'Artagnan's name has become synonymous with a fearless adventurer and a swashbuckling swordsman. At the end of the novel, d'Artagnan's dream of becoming a member of the King's Musketeers is fulfilled, and he is given a commission in the company.
A young, ambitious, self-described "bookman," he presents one of the great mysteries of He acts stubbornly, rashly, and harshly in many circumstances, but the whether the symptoms actually add up to a clinical case of paranoia, as his men claim, is not clear. One of the most interesting sociological phenomena in the book is the "circle of compliance," that forms around Queeg, in which is extravagant orders are performed to perfection within the circle, and utterly ignored outside it.
A young, ambitious, self-described "bookman," he presents one of the great mysteries of He acts stubbornly, rashly, and harshly in many circumstances, but the whether the symptoms actually add up to a clinical case of paranoia, as his men claim, is not clear. One of the most interesting sociological phenomena in the book is the "circle of compliance," that forms around Queeg, in which is extravagant orders are performed to perfection within the circle, and utterly ignored outside it.
Celie A young black Georgia girl who faces adulthood believing that she has been raped by her father and that he killed both of their babies. The novel examines her struggle to find love, self-esteem, and continuing courage despite harsh setbacks.
The protagonist and narrator of . Celie is a poor, uneducated black woman with a sad personal history. She survives a stepfather who rapes her and steals her babies and also survives an abusive husband. As an adult, Celie befriends and finds intimacy with a blues singer, Shug Avery, who gradually helps Celie find her voice. By the end of the novel, Celie is a happy, independent, and self-confident woman.
The tragic hero of Roy is gifted with great athletic abilities, but he can never succeed due to a tragic combination of ego, selfish ambition, and naïveté. While still a teenager on his way to the major leagues, Roy is shot by Harriet Bird and nearly killed. More than ten years later, at the age of thirty-five, Hobbs returns to the game; his body has aged, but his mind and heart are the same.
This guy's a real slime ball. Just look at him: a "short, somewhat popeyed gent" who goes around questioning everyone about their lives, trying to make a living off of telling their secrets to the whole world. And this was even before People magazine turned that into a full-time endeavor. Bump warns Roy about him: "Most newspaper guys are your pals and know when to keep their traps shut, but to Max a private life is a personal insult Before you are here a week he will tell the public how much of your salary you send to your grandma and how good is your sex life." (2.100) Roy doesn't need to be warned. He's already worried about Max, and his worry's justified: He had tailed Roy from the dressing room and had spent a frustrated hour thinking I know this guy but who is he? It was on the tip of his tongue but he couldn't spit it out. He saw the face as he thought he had seen it before somewhere, but what team where, in what league, and doing what that caused him to be remembered? (4.91) The exception was Max Mercy, who continued to concern himself with Roy's past rather than his accomplishments. He spent hours in the morgue, trying to dredge up possible clues to possible crimes, […] wrote for information to prison wardens, sheriffs, county truant officers, heads of orphan asylums, and semipro managers in many cities in the West and Northwest. (8.18) It seems like Max won't be happy until he sees Roy go down. He constantly badgers Roy about his past, but Roy won't give it up. Max is a sportswriter, but he also seems to be involved in some shady dealings. He's always hanging out with Memo and Gus, who turn out to be crooks. He also seemed to know ahead of time that Roy had agreed to fix the playoff game, because he had an article about it already printed as soon as the game was over. Apart from Roy, Max is the only character present throughout the whole novel, and he works as a constant reminder of where Roy came from. Even if Max himself doesn't know, he senses that Roy has some secret and dedicates his life to trying to uncover it. Max saw him when he was a young phenom but doesn't quite recognize him now. He's a savvy enough sportswriter to know that people like Roy just don't come out of nowhere. He finally figures it out, to Roy's disgrace, and the photo of Roy's shooting is front-page news. Max's effort to figure out Roy is a source of constant dramatic tension in the novel. Keep in mind that Malamud was able to create this story line because it took place in the 1950s. Today, anyone with an internet connection could have located all this info in about two seconds. But Max has to write thousands of letters and search through old newspapers. We're always wondering (and so is Roy) when one of his sources will come through and he'll discover the truth.
Hilly is the novel's most dastardly villain. She's married to William Holbrook and has two children, Heather and William, Jr. According to Aibileen, one of her few redeeming qualities is the love and kindness she shows her two children. Hilly is one of the few characters analyzed in depth by all three of The Help's narrators – Aibileen, Minny, and Skeeter – and her conflicts with these characters unite them. On the surface, Hilly's no mustache-twirling villain. In fact, she appears to be totally respectable. She's president of the Jackson Junior League and active in all sorts of charity, including collecting canned goods for The Poor Starving Children of Africa. To give you an idea of Hilly's motives, check out her response when a woman asks why they don't send money instead of cans: "You cannot give these tribal people money […]. There is no Jitney 14 Grocery in the Ogaden Desert. And how would we even know if they're even feeding their kids with it? They're likely to go to the local voodoo tent and get a satanic tattoo with our money." (13.99) Uh, right… This passage helps us see the limits of Hilly's world and vision – her ignorance about the lives and traditions of African people, and her patronizing attitude toward them, mirrors her ideas about the black people in her own community. Yet, she believes that the black people in Jackson are poor because they are lazy and don't spend money wisely, and therefore don't even deserve a living wage. Hilly is simply using The Poor Starving Children of Africa to try to paint a picture of herself as a non-racist person. But, this "charity" work is just the tip of the iceberg of Hilly's villainy. If you cross her, she can have you arrested and imprisoned for stealing, have your friends and family fired from their jobs, have you evicted, have your car repossessed, incite violence against you, and basically run you out of town, all without getting her hands dirty. Hilly's story revolves around her attempts to pass a bill she calls The Home Help Sanitation Initiative. It would require all Mississippi families to build outdoor bathrooms for their black employees. Hilly seems to truly believe that black people carry diseases that can harm white people. Apparently these diseases can only be passed through toilet seats, because black hands touch almost every piece of food Hilly eats, every fork her lips touch, and the pillowcases she lays her head on. Author Kathryn Stockett is merciless here and bursting with wicked irony. Hilly, quite literally, as Hilly's mom points out, "ate two slices of Minny's s***" (26.91) (poo-laced chocolate pie), and winds up with dozens of toilets decorating her front yard, courtesy of Skeeter. Brilliant. Since we don't ever see things from Hilly's point of view, it's hard for us to understand why she goes to such lengths to make life miserable for the black community. The Help, however, makes clear in the section on "white lady's tools" that Hilly is, unfortunately, not the exception, but the rule, among the high-society women in Jackson. Although Hilly is foiled in many ways in the novel, she hasn't changed by the end, at least not from what we can see. It's chilling to notice that even though things have turned out nicely for Aibileen and Minny, Hilly, who is only in her early twenties, will probably be in Jackson wreaking havoc on the lives of its black citizens for decades to come.
Odysseus The central figure in the epic, he employs guile as well as courage to return to Ithaca, defeat the suitors, and resume his proper place as king.
Odysseus is brave, strong, handsome, wily, loyal, pious—and did we mention handsome? He's basically begging for a "hey girl" meme. ("Hey girl. I may have spent seven years with a goddess, but you still look divine to me.) So, what makes this paragon of perfection so darn perfect?
The protagonist of the Odysseus fought among the other Greek heroes at Troy and now struggles to return to his kingdom in Ithaca. Odysseus is the husband of Queen Penelope and the father of Prince Telemachus. Though a strong and courageous warrior, he is most renowned for his cunning. He is a favorite of the goddess Athena, who often sends him divine aid, but a bitter enemy of Poseidon, who frustrates his journey at every turn.
Mr. Godfrey Ablewhite "loved everybody. And everybody loved him" (1.1.8.26). This is Gabriel Betteredge's initial description of Godfrey Ablewhite. We know that Betteredge has known Franklin Blake for ages and thinks very highly of him, but, in Betteredge's opinion, Franklin has nothing on Godfrey:[Godfrey] was, in point of size, the finest man by far of the two. He stood over six feet high; he had a beautiful red and white colour; a smooth round face, shaved as bare as your hand; and a head of lovely long flaxen hair, falling negligently over the poll of his neck. (1.1.8.26)In other words, Godfrey looks like a stereotypically handsome English gentleman: tall, blond, athletic, with a good beefy complexion. Franklin, on the other hand, is shorter and has a kind of foreign look to him from having lived abroad for so long. And in addition, Godfrey is famous for being a philanthropist, or someone who is very active in charities. He is a lawyer (a "barrister" is an English word for the kind of lawyer who files briefs, but doesn't argue in front of a court), and he is also a "ladies' man by temperament" (1.1.8.26).Generally, being called a "ladies' man" wouldn't be much of a compliment – it's too much like being called a "player." Of course, Betteredge only describes Godfrey as a "ladies' man" because Godfrey's charities are all for women's causes. But it's interesting that he should call him that, since we find out later that Godfrey has at least one secret mistress, and most women find him irresistible. So Godfrey really is a "ladies' man," and not in the way that Betteredge meant.At the end of the book, we find out that Godfrey's public face is a total lie: he's keeping up the charade of being a philanthropist in order to keep people from realizing that he's a fraud. His whole public life is a disguise to hide his hypocrisy. So it's appropriate that Godfrey is wearing an actual, literal disguise when Cuff and Franklin Blake discover the truth about him:He traced with his finger a thin line of livid white, running backward from the dead man's forehead, between the swarthy complexion, and the slightly-disturbed black hair. 'Let's see what is under this,' said the Sergeant, suddenly seizing the black hair, with a firm grip of his hand.[…] It was—GODFREY ABLEWHITE. (2.5.1.171, 183).It makes sense for Godfrey to disguise himself when he goes to the bank to redeem the Moonstone – after all, he could probably have guessed that Cuff would be watching the bank to see who picked up the gem from Mr. Luker. But the dramatic "unmasking" of the dead Godfrey Ablewhite works as a symbol for the figurative unmasking that is happening, as well. Franklin Blake and Sergeant Cuff realize that Godfrey Ablewhite isn't as godly and charitable as he wanted everyone to believe.
Godfrey Ablewhite is a renowned philanthropist and leader of several Ladies' Charity Groups in London. He is a cousin of Rachel Verinder's and proposes marriage to Rachel twice. Godfrey begins to look suspicious and hypocritical during Miss Clack's narrative.
Mr. Harvey is a sexual predator, a rapist, a serial killer. He's the 36-year-old neighbor who rapes and murders Susie, within minutes of her own home. Although indispensable to the novel, his story is always secondary to the stories of Susie and her loved ones. After Mr. Harvey leaves Susie's suburban neighborhood, she doesn't watch him as closely, unless he's thinking about Lindsey, or moving back toward her family. Susie is subtle but clear that he carries on his brutalities after her death, but if she sees his hideous acts, she doesn't do much reporting back on them.It's a much-noted fact that Harvey is revealed as Susie's killer from the first pages. This is a powerful use of dramatic irony. The readers are Susie's confidants, privy to the secret she wishes wasn't secret. We watch along with her in suspense for Harvey's guilt to be made known. Susie's constant use of the title "Mr." to refer to her rapist is disconcerting, but it pushes home the point that she viewed him as an authority figure, someone to be trusted, and if not trusted, obeyed.
Look. We shouldn't even have to say this, but we're going to anyway: never trust a European aristocrat in the middle of a jungle. It's just good practice. If Rainsford had known that—well, he probably still would have ended up as tracking practice, but at least maybe he'd have had more than a three-hour start. So who is this guy tracking him through the forest?
A Russian Cossack and expatriate who lives on Ship-Trap Island and enjoys hunting men. General Zaroff’s high cheekbones, sharply defined nose, and pointed military mustache accentuate his mysteriousness and savagery. With a cultivated voice and deliberate, slightly accented way of speaking, his regal bearing and rarefied aristocratic air belie his dementia and sadism. He hunts human beings to experience the most satisfying thrill.
We know, we know, he has quite a bit of a reputation, doesn't he? You'd probably heard of him before he wrote the book. You probably thought he was some kind of amoral, bloodthirsty psychopath. We won't blame you; his name is synonymous with evil politics. But let's get to know him a little better than that, shall we?
We know, we know, he has quite a bit of a reputation, doesn't he? You'd probably heard of him before he wrote the book. You probably thought he was some kind of amoral, bloodthirsty psychopath. We won't blame you; his name is synonymous with evil politics. But let's get to know him a little better than that, shall we?
Heathcliff The main character. Orphaned as a child, he is constantly on the outside, constantly losing people. Although he and Catherine Earnshaw profess that they complete each other, her decision to marry Edgar Linton almost destroys their relationship. He spends most of his life contemplating and acting out revenge. He is abusive, brutal, and cruel.
Heathcliff The main character. Orphaned as a child, he is constantly on the outside, constantly losing people. Although he and Catherine Earnshaw profess that they complete each other, her decision to marry Edgar Linton almost destroys their relationship. He spends most of his life contemplating and acting out revenge. He is abusive, brutal, and cruel.
Heathcliff The main character. Orphaned as a child, he is constantly on the outside, constantly losing people. Although he and Catherine Earnshaw profess that they complete each other, her decision to marry Edgar Linton almost destroys their relationship. He spends most of his life contemplating and acting out revenge. He is abusive, brutal, and cruel.
Heathcliff The main character. Orphaned as a child, he is constantly on the outside, constantly losing people. Although he and Catherine Earnshaw profess that they complete each other, her decision to marry Edgar Linton almost destroys their relationship. He spends most of his life contemplating and acting out revenge. He is abusive, brutal, and cruel.
An orphan brought to live at Wuthering Heights by Mr. Earnshaw, Heathcliff falls into an intense, unbreakable love with Mr. Earnshaw’s daughter Catherine. After Mr. Earnshaw dies, his resentful son Hindley abuses Heathcliff and treats him as a servant. Because of her desire for social prominence, Catherine marries Edgar Linton instead of Heathcliff. Heathcliff’s humiliation and misery prompt him to spend most of the rest of his life seeking revenge on Hindley, his beloved Catherine, and their respective children (Hareton and young Catherine). A powerful, fierce, and often cruel man, Heathcliff acquires a fortune and uses his extraordinary powers of will to acquire both Wuthering Heights and Thrushcross Grange, the estate of Edgar Linton.
An orphan brought to live at Wuthering Heights by Mr. Earnshaw, Heathcliff falls into an intense, unbreakable love with Mr. Earnshaw’s daughter Catherine. After Mr. Earnshaw dies, his resentful son Hindley abuses Heathcliff and treats him as a servant. Because of her desire for social prominence, Catherine marries Edgar Linton instead of Heathcliff. Heathcliff’s humiliation and misery prompt him to spend most of the rest of his life seeking revenge on Hindley, his beloved Catherine, and their respective children (Hareton and young Catherine). A powerful, fierce, and often cruel man, Heathcliff acquires a fortune and uses his extraordinary powers of will to acquire both Wuthering Heights and Thrushcross Grange, the estate of Edgar Linton.
An orphan brought to live at Wuthering Heights by Mr. Earnshaw, Heathcliff falls into an intense, unbreakable love with Mr. Earnshaw’s daughter Catherine. After Mr. Earnshaw dies, his resentful son Hindley abuses Heathcliff and treats him as a servant. Because of her desire for social prominence, Catherine marries Edgar Linton instead of Heathcliff. Heathcliff’s humiliation and misery prompt him to spend most of the rest of his life seeking revenge on Hindley, his beloved Catherine, and their respective children (Hareton and young Catherine). A powerful, fierce, and often cruel man, Heathcliff acquires a fortune and uses his extraordinary powers of will to acquire both Wuthering Heights and Thrushcross Grange, the estate of Edgar Linton.
An orphan brought to live at Wuthering Heights by Mr. Earnshaw, Heathcliff falls into an intense, unbreakable love with Mr. Earnshaw’s daughter Catherine. After Mr. Earnshaw dies, his resentful son Hindley abuses Heathcliff and treats him as a servant. Because of her desire for social prominence, Catherine marries Edgar Linton instead of Heathcliff. Heathcliff’s humiliation and misery prompt him to spend most of the rest of his life seeking revenge on Hindley, his beloved Catherine, and their respective children (Hareton and young Catherine). A powerful, fierce, and often cruel man, Heathcliff acquires a fortune and uses his extraordinary powers of will to acquire both Wuthering Heights and Thrushcross Grange, the estate of Edgar Linton.
Heathcliff’s son by Isabella. Weak, sniveling, demanding, and constantly ill, Linton is raised in London by his mother and does not meet his father until he is thirteen years old, when he goes to live with him after his mother’s death. Heathcliff despises Linton, treats him contemptuously, and, by forcing him to marry the young Catherine, uses him to cement his control over Thrushcross Grange after Edgar Linton’s death. Linton himself dies not long after this marriage.
Heathcliff’s son by Isabella. Weak, sniveling, demanding, and constantly ill, Linton is raised in London by his mother and does not meet his father until he is thirteen years old, when he goes to live with him after his mother’s death. Heathcliff despises Linton, treats him contemptuously, and, by forcing him to marry the young Catherine, uses him to cement his control over Thrushcross Grange after Edgar Linton’s death. Linton himself dies not long after this marriage.
Heathcliff’s son by Isabella. Weak, sniveling, demanding, and constantly ill, Linton is raised in London by his mother and does not meet his father until he is thirteen years old, when he goes to live with him after his mother’s death. Heathcliff despises Linton, treats him contemptuously, and, by forcing him to marry the young Catherine, uses him to cement his control over Thrushcross Grange after Edgar Linton’s death. Linton himself dies not long after this marriage.
Heathcliff’s son by Isabella. Weak, sniveling, demanding, and constantly ill, Linton is raised in London by his mother and does not meet his father until he is thirteen years old, when he goes to live with him after his mother’s death. Heathcliff despises Linton, treats him contemptuously, and, by forcing him to marry the young Catherine, uses him to cement his control over Thrushcross Grange after Edgar Linton’s death. Linton himself dies not long after this marriage.
